<?xml version="1.0" encoding="iso-8859-1" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">

<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Witch-Doctors</title>
      <author><name reg="Beadle, Charles">Charles Beadle</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date value="2007-07-18">July 18, 2007</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">22099</idno>
      <idno type='DPid'>projectID4602f57b1e143</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        <title>Witch-Doctors</title>
        <author>Charles Beadle</author>
        <imprint>
          <publisher>Houghton Mifflin Company</publisher>
          <pubPlace>Boston</pubPlace>
          <pubPlace>New York</pubPlace>
          <date>1922</date>
        </imprint>
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
    <projectDesc>
      <p>Produced by Roland Schlenker
      and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
      &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/c&gt;</p>
      <p>Page-images available at
      &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/projects/projectID4602f57b1e143/&gt;</p>
    </projectDesc>
    <editorialDecl>
      <p>The Proofreading and Formatting Guidelines Version 1.9.c,
      generated January 1, 2006 at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt; were
      used to transcribe this text.</p>
      <p>Corrections were made when it was obvious a mistake was made
      in the original text. An errata is supplied to locate these
      corrections.</p>
      <p>Quotation marks have been changed to TEI
      encoding &lt;q&gt; and &lt;/q&gt;.</p>
      <p>Hyphenated words at the end of a line or at the end of a page
      have had their hyphens removed. The second part of the hyphenated
      word has been moved to the previous line or page. No information
      has been kept as to the location of these changes.</p>
      <p>Characters not in ASCII 7-bit have been changed to TEI
      entities.</p>
      <p>The original book had no table of contents. A table of contents
      was made for this electronic edition.</p>
      <p>There are in the original book many words, which are some times
      hyphenated and other times not, such as Son of the Snake and
      Son-of-the-Snake. No changes were made to the words during transcribing
      to regularize them to one form only.</p>
    </editorialDecl>
    <classDecl>
      <taxonomy id="lc">
        <bibl>
          <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
        </bibl>
      </taxonomy>
    </classDecl>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en">English</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
      <classCode scheme="lc">PS</classCode>
      <classCode scheme="lc">PZ</classCode>
      <keywords scheme="lc">
        <list>
          <item>American literature --
            By period -- 20th century</item>
          <item>American literature --
            Individual authors -- 1900-1960</item>
          <item>Fiction and juvenile belles lettres --
            Fiction in English</item>
        </list>
      </keywords>
    </textClass>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2007-07-18">July 18, 2007</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>Roland Schlenker and<lb/></name>
        <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg Edition</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<text lang="en">

<front>
  <div>
    <divGen type="pgheader"/>
  </div>

  <div>
    <divGen type="encodingDesc"/>
  </div>

  <titlePage rend="page-break-before: right; text-align: center">
  <pb n="3"/><anchor id="Pg3"/>
    <docTitle>
      <titlePart type="main">
        <hi rend="font-size: 325%">Witch-Doctors</hi><lb/>
        <lb/>
      </titlePart>
    </docTitle>
    <byline>
      <hi rend="font-style: italic; font-size: 175%">by</hi>
      <docAuthor>
        <hi rend="font-size: 175%">Charles Beadle</hi><lb/>
        <hi rend="font-style: italic">Author of &ldquo;A Whiteman&rsquo;s
          Burden&rdquo;</hi><lb/>
        <lb/>
      </docAuthor>
    </byline>
    <docImprint>
      <hi rend="font-size: 125%">Boston and New York</hi><lb/>
      <hi rend="font-size: 150%">Houghton Mifflin Company</hi><lb/>
    </docImprint>
    <docDate>
      <hi rend="font-size: 75%">1922</hi><lb/>
    </docDate>
  </titlePage>

  <div rend="page-break-before: always" type="verso">
    <pb n="4"/><anchor id="Pg4"/>
    <p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic; font-size:
    75%">Printed in Great Britain by Butler &amp; Tanner, Frome and
    London</hi></p>
  </div>

  <div rend="page-break-before: always" type="characters">
    <pb n="5"/><anchor id="Pg5"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">
      <hi rend="font-size: 150%">CHARACTERS</hi>
    </head>
    <div rend="margin-left: 2" type="table">
      <table rows="19" cols="2"
             rend="latexcolumns: 'lr'; tblcolumns: 'lw(40) rw(30m)'">
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lucille Charltrain</hi>
          (Mrs. Gerald Birnier)</cell>
          <cell>A Photograph</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Usakuma</hi> (The
          Incarnation of the</cell>
          <cell></cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell>&emsp;&emsp;Unmentionable One)</cell>
          <cell>An Idol</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Gerald Birnier</hi></cell>
          <cell>A Professor</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">zu Pfeiffer</hi>
          (Hermann von Schnitzler und)</cell>
          <cell>German Kommandant</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Zalu Zako</hi>
          (son of Kawa Kendi)</cell>
          <cell>Heir Apparent</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bakuma</hi>
          (daughter of Bakala)</cell>
          <cell>in love with Zalu Zako</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">MYalu</hi>
          (son of MBusa)</cell>
          <cell>a chief in love with Bakuma</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bakahenzie</hi>
          (son of Maliko)</cell>
          <cell>Chief Witch-Doctor</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Marufa</hi>
          (son of MTungo)</cell>
          <cell>another Witch-Doctor</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Kawa Kendi</hi>
          (son of MFunya MPopo)</cell>
          <cell>King-God and Rainmaker</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">MFunya MPopo</hi>
          (son of MKoffo)</cell>
          <cell>Predecessor of Kawa Kendi</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Kingata Mata</hi>
          (son of Kabolo)</cell>
          <cell>Keeper of the Sacred Fires</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Sakamata</hi></cell>
          <cell>deposed Witch-Doctor and spy</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Yabolo</hi></cell>
          <cell>another Witch-Doctor</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mungongo</hi></cell>
          <cell>Birnier&rsquo;s servant</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Schultz</hi></cell>
          <cell>German sergeant</cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ludwig</hi></cell>
          <cell>
            <corr sic="do. do."><anchor id="E1"/><ref
            target="e1">German sergeant</ref></corr>
          </cell>
        </row>
        <row>
          <cell><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Schneider</hi></cell>
          <cell>
            <corr sic="do. do."><anchor id="E2"/><ref
            target="e2">German sergeant</ref></corr>
          </cell>
        </row>
      </table>
    </div>
  </div>

  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">Contents</head>
    <divGen type="toc"/>
  </div>
</front>

<body>

<!-- <pb n="i"/><anchor id="Pgi"/>
[Blank Page] -->

<!-- <pb n="ii"/><anchor id="Pgii"/>
[Blank Page] -->

<!-- <pb n="1"/><anchor id="Pg1"/>
[Extra Page]

Witch-Doctors -->

<!-- <pb n="2"/><anchor id="Pg2"/>
[Extra Page]

/*
<hi rend="font-style: italic">L&rsquo;homme est bien insens&eacute;! il
ne s&ccedil;auroit forger un ciron, et
forge des dieux &agrave; douzaine!</hi>

    MONTAIGNE
*/ -->

<!-- <pb n="3"/><anchor id="Pg3"/>
[Title Page]

Witch-Doctors

<hi rend="font-style: italic">by</hi> Charles Beadle

<hi rend="font-style: italic">Author of <q>A Whiteman&rsquo;s Burden</q></hi>

Boston and New York

Houghton Mifflin Company

1922 -->

<!-- <pb n="4"/><anchor id="Pg4"/>
[Verso]

<hi rend="font-style: italic">Printed in Great Britain by Butler &amp; Tanner, Frome and London</hi> -->

<!-- <pb n="5"/><anchor id="Pg5"/>
[Extra Page]

CHARACTERS

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lucille Charltrain</hi> (Mrs. Gerald Birnier) A Photograph

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Usakuma</hi> (The Incarnation of the Unmentionable One) An Idol

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Gerald Birnier</hi> A Professor

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">zu Pfeiffer</hi> (Hermann von Schnitzler und) German Kommandant

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Zalu Zako</hi> (son of Kawa Kendi) Heir Apparent

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bakuma</hi> (daughter of Bakala) in love with Zalu Zako

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">MYalu</hi> (son of MBusa) a chief in love with Bakuma

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Bakahenzie</hi> (son of Maliko) Chief Witch-Doctor

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Marufa</hi> (son of MTungo) another Witch-Doctor

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Kawa Kendi</hi> (son of MFunya MPopo) King-God and Rainmaker

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">MFunya MPopo</hi> (son of MKoffo) Predecessor of Kawa Kendi

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Kingata Mata</hi> (son of Kabolo) Keeper of the Sacred Fires

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Sakamata</hi> deposed Witch-Doctor and spy

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Yabolo</hi> another Witch-Doctor

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Mungongo</hi> Birnier&rsquo;s servant

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Schultz</hi> German sergeant

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Ludwig</hi> do. do.

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Schneider</hi> do. do. -->

<!-- <pb n="6"/><anchor id="Pg6"/>
[Blank Page] -->

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD01" type="chapter">
<pb n="7"/><anchor id="Pg7"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head type="sub" rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 150%">WITCH-DOCTORS</hi>
</head>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 1</hi>
</head>

<p>In a bayou in the south-eastern corner of the
Victoria Nyanza was the station of Ingonya, a brown
scab on the face of the green earth. The round mud
huts of the askaris were like two columns of khaki troops
marching rigidly on each side of the parade ground.
To the north, upon a slight rise of ground, were the
white men&rsquo;s quarters; the non-commissioned officers
had four bungalows to the south of the orderly room
and Court House; and beyond a green plot flanked
by a store house and an ordnance building, was a
bigger bungalow, florid in the amplitude and colour of
the red pillared verandah, the residence of the Kommandant,
Herr Ober-Lieutenant Hermann von Schnitzler
und zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p>On the northern side, overlooking the swamp and
the distant lake, was a flagpole, before which paced
an ebon sentry in a uniform of white knickers, tunic
and lancer cap, red faced. The glow of sunrise
stained the green of the moon with crimson. A
trumpet blared. From the rear of the Residence
marched with stiff-legged precision a squad of askaris
and the stocky figure of a non-commissioned officer in a
white helmet. Simultaneously appeared on the verandah
of the large bungalow the tall form of a white man
<pb n="8"/><anchor id="Pg8"/>
in pink silk pyjamas. The sergeant barked. The squad
presented arms. A coloured ball slid up the flagpole.
The first rays of the sun splintered the bloodied
waters beyond into silver spikes and caressed a fluttering
black, white and red flag.</p>

<p>Then the squad ported arms, relieved the sentry,
and retired, their black legs gleaming blue points as
they rose and fell. The pink figure disappeared.
Sergeant Schultz strutted back to his bungalow, in the
verandah of which squatted a native girl clad in gay
trade cloths. He emerged lighting a cigar, and
sjambok in hand, returned to the orderly room.
Another trumpet blared. From beyond the askaris&rsquo;
camp came a line of natives, young and old, their
scrawny necks linked together by a light iron chain
which clanked musically. Filing on to the parade
ground they were divided into gangs by Sergeant
Schneider to labour under guard at the interminable
work of the camp.</p>

<p>The air above the swamp began to sizzle in the heat.
The same slender figure clad in immaculate white
reappeared upon the south verandah of the florid
bungalow. Herr Ober-Lieutenant stood staring about
the small square with a peevish glint in the fair eyes.
A big negro in spotless white hurried around the house
bearing a brass tray set with a cup, a liqueur glass and
a decanter. Herr Lieutenant sprawled his legs on
either arm of a Bombay chair. As he delicately
mixed cognac with his coffee, his jewelled fingers
sparkled in a shaft of sunlight which set afire the
sapphires mounted in an ivory bracelet.</p>

<p>At a yard from the table stood the servant as rigid
as the flagpole. With a lazy insolence which marked
<pb n="9"/><anchor id="Pg9"/>
his movements, the lieutenant sipped the caf&eacute;-cognac
and smoked a cheroot, as if he were seated on the terrace
of the Caf&eacute; de la Paix. The brutality of the round
skull, emphasized by the cropped blonde hair, seemed
at variance with the boyish rotundity of the face and the
small, but dominant, nose. Two separate moustaches
bristled so fiercely that they suggested sentries on
guard over the feminine softness of the lips. When
he had finished zu Pfeiffer arose languidly, lighted a
fresh cigar, adjusted his helmet with care, took a gold-mounted
sjambok from his servant, and strode across
the square. The lines of his torso were so perfect
that they suggested artificial aid.</p>

<p>The orderly room was square and whitewashed;
grass matting was upon the floor, and high screened
doors opened on to the north verandah. Zu Pfeiffer
sprawled in a swing chair before the office desk placed
at an oblique angle to the wall, encumbered with
books and papers. After tapping reflectively on a book
cover with a polished nail zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s hand sharply
struck the bell. Instantly a corporal appeared at the
farther door and stood as if petrified, black hand to
black temple. Zu Pfeiffer snapped instructions in
Kiswahili without removing his cigar. The man
grunted, shot his hand away at right angles with as
much energy as if he were trying to knock down an
elephant, and vanished.</p>

<p><q>Sergeant!</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence.</q></p>

<p>At the other door like another Jack-in-the-box
appeared Sergeant Schultz in exactly the same attitude.
At a nod the sergeant melted into the semblance of
human movement: he drew aside a chair, selected a
<pb n="10"/><anchor id="Pg10"/>
certain document from a pile of them, and handed it to
the lieutenant. Zu Pfeiffer pushed a box of cigars
across the table, lolled back with one foot on the table,
and began to peruse lazily. The sergeant retired
respectfully with the cigar to the outer office. A fly
buzzed hopefully at the mosquito wire. The tap of
a typewriter sounded like some other insect. On the
hot air came the faint barks of a drill-sergeant on the
parade ground. From behind the building rose fitfully
the murmur of voices from a herd of natives
squatted in the sun awaiting the opening of the Court
House. Leaves rustled largely under the Lieutenant&rsquo;s
fingers.&hellip;</p>

<p>At length he pitched the report on to the table, carefully
placed the butt of his cigar in an ash-tray, lighted
another, and disposed of the match with equal care.</p>

<p><q>Sergeant.</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence!</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer indicated a chair by a thrust of the chin.
The sergeant sat. Tapping the report with the highly
polished and very long finger-nail of the left hand, the
lieutenant demanded:</p>

<p><q>Who is the man who gave you this report?</q></p>

<p><q>Ali Ben Hassan, an Arab trader, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Trustworthy?</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence. He has done much work for us.</q></p>

<p><q>Where?</q></p>

<p><q>On the Tanganika district, sub-division B 
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">II</hi>,
Excellence. He brought papers of first-class recommendation
from the Kommandant.</q></p>

<p><q>Ben Hassan speaks of one Sakamata, nicht wahr?</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Of what tribe is he?</q></p>
<pb n="11"/><anchor id="Pg11"/>

<p><q>Wongolo.</q></p>

<p><q>A witch-doctor?</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>He is here? Let him come in.</q></p>

<p>The sergeant rose, saluted and departed. Gutturals
sounded lazily. The sergeant reappeared and behind
him shuffled a native. Clad only in a dirty loin-cloth,
his brown skin was wrinkled in scaly folds upon
his chest and belly; his face was like an ancient
tortoise; the small lack-lustre eyes were bloodshot and
furtive; the limbs were almost fleshless. He squatted
upon the ground and with lowered lids appeared to
be absorbed in the contemplation of a white man&rsquo;s table
leg. Zu Pfeiffer regarded the man as one would a
stray dog and nodded to the sergeant, who sat
down.</p>

<p><q>Does he speak Kiswahili?</q></p>

<p><q>Nein, Excellence. Only his monkey speech.</q></p>

<p><q>Why do you suppose that he is trustworthy?</q></p>

<p><q>Because, Excellence, his interests are with ours.
There is no competition. The Schweinh&uuml;nde Engl&auml;nder
have no interest there&mdash;yet. They are too busy
with the Uganda railroad.</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, ja. Again what is the tribal system there,
King-God or&qdash;</q> The lieutenant permitted a
slight smile&mdash;<q>or Dis-established Church?</q></p>

<p><q>King-God, Excellence,</q> replied Sergeant Schultz
gravely.</p>

<p><q>This fellow then is an apostate priest, nicht wahr?</q></p>

<p>The sergeant noticed the movement of one of the
sentry moustaches. A twitch of the lips recognized
his superior&rsquo;s pleasantry.</p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence.</q></p>
<pb n="12"/><anchor id="Pg12"/>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer stuck the cigar into the corner of his
mouth and regarded idly the dumb figure on the
floor against the wall.</p>

<p><q>We must have the Wongolo country, c&rsquo;est
entendu. Now what&rsquo;s your opinion of the method,
sergeant?</q></p>

<p><q>With due deference, Excellence,</q> responded
Sergeant Schultz, <q>I propose that we advance and
bring them to subjection in the usual manner.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer fingered a ring and stared out into the
yellow glare.</p>

<p><q>Nein,</q> he said at length, meditatively, removed
the cigar from his lips and delicately knocked off the
ash. <q>Circumstances alter cases. That method is
too expensive. Son Altesse cannot afford the blood of
the Fatherland in return for such ignoble carcasses.
We&mdash;the price paid in the Herrero campaign was
insupportable.</q></p>

<p><q>Pardon, Excellence, but Treitschke said&qdash;</q></p>

<p><q>I know, sergeant. But Treitschke did not live in
Central Africa.</q></p>

<p><q>True, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Die Schweinh&uuml;nde Engl&auml;nder have had more
experience than we have. Even a fool learns wisdom
by experience&mdash;sometimes.</q></p>

<p><q>True, Excellence.</q></p>

<p>Again fell a silence save for the buzz of the persistent
fly.</p>

<p><q>Also psychological research is more valuable than
artillery&mdash;sometimes&mdash;in spite of Napoleon and
Treitschke.</q> Zu Pfeiffer glanced at the sergeant who,
beneath the mask of his features, appeared shocked.
<q>Blasphemy, nicht wahr, sergeant?</q></p>
<pb n="13"/><anchor id="Pg13"/>

<p><q>If your Excellence thinks&qdash;</q></p>

<p><q>But remember if Napoleon invented the science of
artillery, we invented psychology.</q></p>

<p><q>True, Excellence.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer smiled complacently and stroked his
moustaches.</p>

<p><q>Now for this animal here. Who and what was
he?</q></p>

<p><q>One of the principal witch-doctors, Excellence,
wealthy and powerful. He attempted to overthrow
the Chief Witch-doctor, one Bakahenzie, and was
discredited.</q></p>

<p><q>How discredited?</q></p>

<p><q>He attempted some form of magic, Excellence,
which failed. Details are not given.</q></p>

<p><q>Who gave the dossier?</q></p>

<p><q>Ali ben Hassan, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>From whom did he get his information?</q></p>

<p><q>Name given as one Yabolo, another witch-doctor
and relative.</q></p>

<p><q>This Saka&mdash;Saka</q>&mdash;<corr
sic="Zu"><anchor id="E3"/><ref target="e3">zu</ref></corr>
Pfeiffer glanced at the
document&mdash;<q>Sakamata. Is he in communication with
this Yabolo?</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer smoked reflectively.</p>

<p><q>When did the last agent come in?</q></p>

<p><q>But yesterday, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>And no report of any other white men in the
country? No British missionaries or traders?</q></p>

<p><q>Nein, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Where is Saunders?</q></p>

<p><q>On Lake Kivu.</q></p>

<p><q>No report?</q></p>
<pb n="14"/><anchor id="Pg14"/>

<p><q>Not since the last three months ago, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Umph!&mdash;Now, pay attention.</q> Schultz leaned
forward dutifully. Zu Pfeiffer unrolled a map on the
wall beside him. <q>Here&rsquo;s Ingonya. The Wongolo
country is twenty days&rsquo; march from here, but across
the lake it&rsquo;s twenty hours with the launch, and five
days from there.</q> The delicate finger-nail indicated
a spot on the opposite side of the lake. <q>From
here&mdash;what&rsquo;s the place? Ach&mdash;Timballa. To hell
with the British boundary! We must not give them
time to get the news. Always rush the seat of government.
Surprise them and they&rsquo;re done.</q></p>

<p><q>But, Excellence, Treitschke says regarding retreat&qdash;</q></p>

<p><q>There will be no retreat. At
<corr sic="MFunga"><anchor id="E4"/><ref
target="e4">MFunya</ref></corr>
MPopo&rsquo;s
is the idol, the fetish. We destroy it and they&rsquo;re
done!</q> He brought down his fist with a crash on
the table. <q>Faith unites a people; in unity is
strength. Break the faith and you&rsquo;ve broken the
people.</q></p>

<p><q>But, Excellence!</q> exclaimed the Lutheran sergeant,
aghast.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s blue eyes hardened.</p>

<p><q>Understand, you fool, these are savages.
<hi rend="font-style: italic">You</hi>
have an abstract deity&mdash;which you cannot break in
the concrete&mdash;obviously: they have a concrete god
which we can and shall smash.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence, you are right,</q> said the sergeant
humbly.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer flicked cigar ash from his sleeve and
lolled back.</p>

<p><q>Those are your orders. Commandeer the necessary
canoes and notify Ludwig to have the men in
<pb n="15"/><anchor id="Pg15"/>
readiness for the full moon. Work out the details and
give them to me to-morrow.</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence.</q> Schultz stood to attention.
<q>But, Excellence, this creature&qdash;</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer glanced casually at Sakamata.</p>

<p><q>Oh, that? Take it away!</q></p>

<p>Schultz saluted smartly and wheeled about.</p>

<p><q>Njoo!</q> he commanded sharply.</p>

<p>Sakamata rose up quietly and disappeared through
the door without glancing to the right or the left.</p>

<p><q>The Court awaits your Excellence,</q> reminded the
sergeant.</p>

<p>As
<corr sic="Zu"><anchor id="E5"/><ref
target="e5">zu</ref></corr>
Pfeiffer nodded languidly, a booted foot
clopped on the verandah.</p>

<p><q>Wa da?</q> queried Sergeant Schultz, startled at
the intrusion of a stranger.</p>

<p><q>Oh, only I,</q> responded a soft voice in English.</p>

<p>Through the screen door a tall figure in a Tirai
hat was silhouetted in sepia against the yellow glare.
A brown hand pushed open the door.</p>

<p><q>Mon nom est Birnier, Gerald Birnier&mdash;er&mdash;Does
any one speak English?</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer, in the act of rising, sank back into the
chair, placing his left leg in a favourite position and
selecting a cigar simultaneously.</p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> said he, almost without accent. <q>What do
you want?</q></p>

<p><q>I wish to see the&mdash;the Herr Kommandant.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer struck a match without looking up.</p>

<p><q>I am he.</q></p>

<p>One hand upon the open door, Birnier stroked his
shaven chin perplexedly with the other. He glanced
from the sergeant, standing rigidly by the table, to
<pb n="16"/><anchor id="Pg16"/>
the lieutenant engaged in stoking his cigar to a
nicety.</p>

<p><q>Well, it&rsquo;s usual to invite a white man to sit down,
isn&rsquo;t it?</q> suggested Birnier, with a note of irritation.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer looked across the table.</p>

<p><q>Nein. This is the Orderly Room; not a general
office.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, I see. I beg your pardon!</q> There was a
note of laughter in the voice. <q>Will you kindly
instruct me where I am to apply?</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer continued to regard the stranger from
head to foot, smoking slowly.</p>

<p><q>Please to come in,</q> he said at length, gesturing
with his cigar, <q>and sit down.</q></p>

<p><q>Thanks so much!</q></p>

<p>The trace of irony seemed to escape
<corr sic="Zu"><anchor id="E6"/><ref
target="e6">zu</ref></corr>
Pfeiffer. He
gave a guttural order to the sergeant, who saluted and
disappeared. The stranger placed his Tirai hat on the
table, revealing rumpled brown hair flecked with grey,
a high white forehead, and long features; the slight
stoop of the shoulders and general carriage rather
suggested a professional type than a hunter or trader.
He regarded the slim figure staring insolently at him
with a hardening look of disapproval.</p>

<p><q>What is it you wish?</q></p>

<p><q>Well, principally I require an elephant licence
and the usual permit to trade.</q></p>

<p><q>Where are you going?</q></p>

<p><q>To the Kivu country.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer regarded his cigar tip interestedly.</p>

<p><q>You are going to the Wongolo country,</q> he stated.</p>

<p>Birnier&rsquo;s mouth tightened.</p>

<p><q>Quite possibly.</q></p>
<pb n="17"/><anchor id="Pg17"/>

<p><q>You have been to the Wongolo country already?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I have been there, but what has that to do
with it?</q></p>

<p><q>We know all about you,</q> stated zu Pfeiffer coldly,
twiddling his cigar between slender fingers. He
glanced at a gold repeater. <q>Pardon, but I must
request you to return later. The Court is already
awaiting me.</q> Birnier frowned slightly. <q>If you
will be so good as to return at, let us say, five o&rsquo;clock,
I will be pleased to listen to your application.</q></p>

<p>Birnier rose, taking his hat.</p>

<p><q>Certainly,</q> he said curtly. <q>Good morning!</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer watched him depart; then he struck
the bell sharply. Sergeant Schultz appeared, a line of
nervous expectancy upon his sallow face.</p>

<p><q>Why have you not reported that man&rsquo;s arrival?</q>
demanded 
<corr sic="Zu"><anchor id="E7"/><ref
target="e7">zu</ref></corr>
Pfeiffer harshly.</p>

<p><q>Excellence,</q> returned Schultz, saluting, <q>he has
but arrived within the hour in a launch, loaned to him
by the Engl&auml;nder.</q></p>

<p><q>Ach! An English spy!</q></p>

<p><q>I do not know, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>We ought to know. Why have you not a report of
the man&rsquo;s movements? He admits that he has been
in the Wongolo country.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence, it is already done.</q> Schultz hurriedly
searched a card index cabinet and handed a document
to the lieutenant. <q>There is Saunders&rsquo; report, Excellence;
more than six months old.</q></p>


<p>Zu Pfeiffer glanced at the page indicated and began
to read while the sergeant stood stiffly at attention.</p>

<p><q>You may go, sergeant,</q> announced zu Pfeiffer
without looking up. Schultz saluted and departed.
<pb n="18"/><anchor id="Pg18"/>
Zu
<corr sic="Peiffer"><anchor id="E8"/><ref
target="e8">Pfeiffer</ref></corr>
finished the report leisurely, put down the
paper, and stared meditatively.</p>

<p>No, he decided, as he rose, all the English are
spies.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD02" type="chapter">
<pb n="19"/><anchor id="Pg19"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 2</hi>
</head>

<p>Like a topaz set in a jade ring was the city of the
Snake, the place of Kings, a village of some eight
hundred huts huddled upon a slight rise above a sea of
banana fronds, some two hundred miles to the west of
Ingonya.</p>

<p>On the summit was a large conical hut like an enormous
candle snuffer, the dwelling place of Usakuma,
the spirit of the Snake, whose name was forbidden to
all save the Priest-God and Rain Maker, King MFunya
MPopo, who was so holy that after succeeding to the
sacred office he was doomed to live within the compound,
even as were the Kings of Eutopia, Sheba and
China, a celibate for the remainder of his life: for, as
the incarnation of the Idol, Usakuma, and therefore the
controller of the Heavens and the Earth, his body
must be kept from all danger of witchcraft lest the
rains cease and the blue skies fall.</p>

<p>From the compound, looking towards the north-west
where the snow-capped Gamballagalla rose violet
against the horizon, another brown cone peeped above
the green fronds, the late residence, and now the tomb
of King MKoffo, predecessor of MFunya MPopo.
For where a King-God dies there is he buried, he and
his wives after him; the site becomes holy ground, a
place of pilgrimage and sanctuary.</p>

<p>In each of the small huts to the rear of the temple of
MFunya MPopo, but outside the sacred enclosure, lived
<pb n="20"/><anchor id="Pg20"/>
his wives who, although forbidden to their husband,
were permitted a royal promiscuity. Just within the
precincts was a small replica of the temple where dwelt
a young chief, also bound to celibacy, whose duties
were to keep the royal fire burning as long as the king
should reign. No one was allowed to converse with
the king, save on matters of state, except this man;
through him was spoken the royal will&mdash;what there
was left of it&mdash;to the council which sat in a long
rectangular building opposite to the temple entrance
and open to the village, a body of witch-doctors and
chiefs.</p>

<p>Solely the kingly office existed as a beneficent agent,
a matter of self-preservation on the part of the tribe.
The King-God&rsquo;s functions were divine; to make
magic for the victory of his warriors and principally to
make rain, on which, of course, the alimentary needs of
his subjects depended&mdash;an incarnation of a god who
was in reality the scapegoat of the god&rsquo;s omissions.</p>

<p>The office was hereditary. Perhaps no one else
would willingly accept such an onerous post. The
making of magic was performed before the god with the
assistance of the chief witch-doctor, an exceedingly
lucrative post won upon merit, occupied by one
Bakahenzie, a tall muscular man in the prime of life,
whose bearing was that of the native autocrat, fierce
and remorseless. The King&rsquo;s personal wishes could be
safely granted as long as he did not endanger the
existence of the people by a desire to break any of the
meshes of the tabus designed to ensure the safety of his
sacred body, and therefore that of the tribe, on the
assumption that if the incarnation were injured the god
would be injured, and so would his creations be
<pb n="21"/><anchor id="Pg21"/>
affected: any infringement of these laws entailed the
penalty of death, a code which revealed the native
logic in the confusion of cause and effect, the concrete
and the abstract.</p>

<p>In the door of a hut on the outskirts of the village
squatted a wizened man with a tuft of grey beard upon
his chin. He was clad in a loin-cloth fairly clean, and
about his neck was suspended by a twisted fibre an
amulet wrapped in banana leaves containing the gall
and toenail of an enemy slain by a virgin warrior, a
specific against black magic whose powerful properties
were proven by the undisputed influence and wealth
of the owner.</p>

<p>A tall lithe savage, bearing upon his arms and ankles
the ivory bracelets of the royal house and the elephant
hair chaplet of the warrior, advanced leisurely towards
him from the banana plantation. Marufa continued
to gaze in rumination at the opposite hut. But as they
had not met since the rising of the sun, he did not fail to
make the orthodox greeting at the exact moment that
the chief&rsquo;s shadow passed in front of him, which Zalu
Zako returned punctiliously, thereby averting an evil
omen. As soon as the young man had passed beyond
the next hut appeared in the grove a girl, modelled like
a bronze wood nymph. She wore the tiny girdle of the
unmarried and walked furtively, carrying in her hand a
parcel wrapped in banana leaves. In the shadow of a
compound fence she halted, one slender brown arm set
back in apprehension as her eyes followed the lithe
figure of Zalu Zako.</p>

<p>Motionless sat Marufa staring in mystic contemplation.
Bakuma glanced swiftly about her. Apparently
satisfied that no one was observing her save a lean dog
<pb n="22"/><anchor id="Pg22"/>
and two gollywog children, she continued on as if to
pass the old man, her eyes still ranging like a fawn&rsquo;s.
But when she was beside Marufa she subsided on her
haunches beside him, clutching the bundle as she
whispered:</p>

<p><q>Greetings, O wise one!</q></p>

<p><q>Greeting, daughter,</q> returned Marufa without
lessening the fixity of his gaze.</p>

<p><q>I would talk with thee.</q></p>

<p><q>Aye.</q></p>

<p>Again she glanced around furtively.</p>

<p><q>I would talk in thine ear, O my father.</q></p>

<p><q>The knots of my hair are tied.</q></p>

<p><q>I thank thee. There&rsquo;s a fluttering bird in my
breast.</q></p>

<p><q>And a snake around thy heart, O my daughter.</q></p>

<p><q>Aie-e!</q></p>

<p><q>The grandson of the snake hath tied thy girdle.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p>The girl clasped her breast in surprised terror.</p>

<p><q>How dost thou know?</q></p>

<p><q>All things are known to the son of MTungo,</q>
declared Marufa solemnly, still regarding the opposite
wall. <q>Thou desirest a love charm.&hellip; What hast
thou?</q></p>

<p>Tremulously Bakuma put down the green package on
the ground, darting terrified glances to right and left.
Slowly the skinny hand of the wizard gently tore open
the leaves; very impressively the eyes slanted down to
appraise the stock of blue and white beads.</p>

<p><q>The spirit of Tarum hath a big belly,</q> he
announced tonelessly.</p>

<p><q>O wise one, intercede for me,</q> pleaded Bakuma,
<pb n="23"/><anchor id="Pg23"/>
<q>for more have I none, I, Bakuma, daughter of Bakala,
a girl of the hut thatch.</q></p>

<p><q>The true love charm, infallible and powerful, is
difficult to obtain, O Bakuma. The young huntress
aims at big game.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh! But I have no more, great one!</q></p>

<p><q>The hair of a rutting leopardess, the liver of a
forest rat, the tongue of a Baroto bird&mdash;these must I
have to mix with thy blood to be drunk by thy man
when the moon is full.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh! Ehh!</q></p>

<p><q>Such is the magic that no young man can
resist.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh-h!</q></p>

<p><q>But these things are difficult to obtain.</q></p>

<p><q>Aie! Aie!</q> wailed Bakuma, clasping her hands in
despair.</p>

<p><q>Difficult to obtain.</q></p>

<p><q>Aie-e!</q></p>

<p><q>On the night of the half-moon will I take upon me
the leopard form.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p><q>I will talk with the spirits.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh! Ehh!</q></p>

<p><q>But they must be propitiated with the blood of a
fat goat.</q></p>

<p><q>Aie! Aie! But I have no fat goat.</q></p>

<p><q>If there be no fat goat then will the spirits be
wroth with me.</q></p>

<p><q>Aie-e-e!</q></p>

<p>Bakuma sat staring in dismal perplexity.</p>

<p><q>No fat goat have I, a girl of the hut thatch! Aie!
Aie!</q></p>
<pb n="24"/><anchor id="Pg24"/>

<p>Marufa fumbled within the loin-cloth and thrust a
tiny package along the ground.</p>

<p><q>See and know the power of my magic.</q> Bakuma
greedily snatched up the amulet. <q>Begone!</q> he
whispered, jerking the parcel of beads behind him.
<q>MYalu approaches.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p>Bakuma rose and fled with the grace of a startled
antelope as appeared a tall, strongly built man, having a
low-browed face, across which was a deep scar. Behind
MYalu came two young slaves bearing a small elephant
tusk. Opposite to Marufa the slaves stopped. Their
master, careful that his shadow fell well away from the
figure of the magician&mdash;for the shadow is one of the
souls, so woe unto him who shall leave his soul in the
hands of an enemy!&mdash;squatted gravely.</p>

<p><q>Greeting, son of MTungo!</q></p>

<p><q>Greeting, son of MBusa!</q> returned Marufa.</p>

<p>Gravely they spat into each other&rsquo;s palm, the sign
of amity as they who exchange bonds of good behaviour
inasmuch, as is well known, magic can be worked upon
that which has been a part of the body as upon the body
itself. Then solemnly they rubbed the spittle upon
their respective chests.</p>

<p><q>The spirit of the snake nourisheth not the life of
the banana.</q></p>

<p><q>Nay, for nigh unto two moons hath there been no
blood of the snake,</q> returned the old man perfunctorily,
as he lifted his eyes from a swift appraisement of the
tusk to his favourite mud wall.</p>

<p><q>Nay, the crops sprout not. Maybe the Dweller
in the Place of the Snake hath been visited by one from
the forest.</q></p>
<pb n="25"/><anchor id="Pg25"/>

<p><q>Aye, but old blood runs not as swiftly as young
blood.</q></p>

<p><q>Nay,</q> replied MYalu, in answer to the reference
to himself, <q>but the girdle is not yet tied by
another.</q></p>

<p><q>When the first twig of the nest is laid,</q> remarked
Marufa, indolently eyeing the tusk, <q>it is difficult to
entice the hen to another tree.</q></p>

<p><q>Here is a goodly twig with which to tempt spirits
of the forest,</q> and significantly, <q>Maybe there are
others.</q></p>

<p><q>A mighty potion shall be prepared for thee, O son
of MBusa,</q> declared Marufa, moving slightly to
conceal the package of beads. <q>A mighty potion,
infallible; made from the hair of a rutting leopardess,
the liver of the forest rat and the tongue of the Baroto
bird; these must she take that she shall speak thee
softly, together with a portion of that which remains
from the ceremony of the lobolo. Infallible is it;
never known to fail.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p>Marufa stared interestedly at a wandering hen.
MYalu watched him covertly. Like bronzes sat the
two young slaves. From the distance came a faint
chanting and the beat of a drum.&hellip;</p>

<p><q>The tusk is here, Marufa,</q> remarked MYalu
casually.</p>

<p><q>My eyes see it,</q> observed Marufa, without altering
his observation of the hen.</p>

<p><q>Where then is the potion?</q></p>

<p>Marufa glanced at the tusk, appraised it again, and
fumbling within his loin-cloth, thrust another tiny
package along the ground. MYalu greedily picked up
<pb n="26"/><anchor id="Pg26"/>
the amulet and stared in awe, turning it over and
about.</p>

<p><q>The tusk,</q> murmured Marufa.</p>

<p>MYalu gestured to his slaves. They rose and placed
the tusk beside the old man, shuffled backwards and
squatted again. After lifting one end to test the
weight, Marufa examined the grain. Then sliding it
behind him as if he wished to sit upon it, remarked:</p>

<p><q>The potion must be eaten at the full moon.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p>MYalu glanced up from an absorbed examination of
the amulet.</p>

<p><q>And within the quarter shall the fruit be ripe for
the plucking.</q> The whites of MYalu&rsquo;s eyes gleamed.
<q>Unless,</q> continued the old man uninterestedly,
<q>there be stronger magic made against thee.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p>The two hands holding the amulet came down.</p>

<p><q>If,</q> explained Marufa, <q>another hath tied the
grasses of her father&rsquo;s roof, will there be required a
stronger spirit to overcome such magic.</q></p>

<p><q>But thou hast told me,</q> expostulated MYalu,
regarding the tusk regretfully, <q>that this is a mighty
magic, powerful and infallible, never known to fail.</q></p>

<p><q>Thus is it,</q> asserted the old man imperturbably,
<q>for all save a stronger magic.</q></p>

<p>MYalu&rsquo;s eyes wandered from the tusk to Marufa and
back. He scowled.</p>

<p><q>Why didst thou not tell me?</q> he demanded
sourly, dropping the amulet on the ground.</p>

<p><q>It is for thee to tell the wizard all that thou
knowest. How else may he reckon with thine
enemies?</q></p>
<pb n="27"/><anchor id="Pg27"/>

<p><q>Enemy!</q> exclaimed MYalu. He stared questioningly
at Marufa. <q>Enemy! Dost thou know whom I
seek?</q></p>

<p><q>Do not all the hens remark the strutting of the
cock?</q> inquired Marufa unconcernedly, tapping his
snuff box.</p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p>MYalu observed the taking of snuff as if he had
never seen the operation before.</p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> he remarked again succinctly.</p>

<p>Marufa replaced the cork of twisted leaves, let fall
the snuff box made of rhinoceros horn suspended from
his neck by a copper wire, and contemplated a skinny
goat scratching itself violently. MYalu stirred as if to
rise, but subsided, cogitated and said slowly:</p>

<p><q>In the house of MYalu are four more tusks.</q></p>

<p><q>Four more tusks,</q> repeated Marufa dreamily.</p>

<p><q>Bigger than this one,</q> said MYalu suggestively.</p>

<p><q>Bigger than this one.</q></p>

<p><q>Knowest thou by whom the girdle is tied?</q></p>

<p><q>By the grandson of the Snake.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p>MYalu squatted motionless. The old man appeared
to doze. Women bearing gourds of water upon their
heads passed in single file, their loins swaying rhythmically.
The shadows dwindled. From close at
hand began the rapid beat of a drum. A stir began
through the village as each man herded his women and
slaves to his own hut.</p>

<p><q>O Marufa,</q> said MYalu, speaking with a slight
snarl, <q>hast thou such a powerful medicine that can
surely trap the soul of Zalu Zako when perchance it
wanders (in sleep)?</q></p>
<pb n="28"/><anchor id="Pg28"/>

<p><q>All things are possible to the son of MTungo,</q>
mumbled the old man.</p>

<p>Two chiefs appeared walking through the grove at a
middle distance. MYalu glanced round apprehensively.</p>

<p><q>Two tusks will I give thee,</q> he whispered, <q>if
thou wilt do this thing.</q></p>

<p><q>Three tusks. No less, for the matter is dangerous.</q></p>

<p><q>Two, two.</q></p>

<p><q>Nay.</q></p>

<p>The old man stirred to rise.</p>

<p><q>Three be it,</q> gasped MYalu. <q>But I must see the
magic done.</q></p>

<p>They rose together.</p>

<p><q>Bring me of his toe-nails one paring, of his hair
one, and his spittle and a footprint. Then shalt thou
come with me to the sacred grove where the magic
shall be done.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p><q>But the three tusks must be given to Yanoka, my
first wife.</q></p>

<p>MYalu hesitated.</p>

<p><q>Aye, thus shall it be done,</q> he assented reluctantly.</p>

<p><q>It is agreed?</q> inquired Marufa.</p>

<p><q>May my cord be lost!</q> swore MYalu, and gesturing
to the slaves, hurried away.</p>

<p>A slight grin flecked the old man&rsquo;s eyes as he turned
into the hut.</p>

<p><q>Already hath he drunken of her blood,</q> he
mumbled. <q>Ya, Inkombana! take the tusk!</q></p>

<p>When Marufa emerged, a head-dress of the tail
feathers of the green parrot, professional uniform and
potent specific against evil spirits, fluffed gently as he
<pb n="29"/><anchor id="Pg29"/>
slowly stalked towards the council house. From the
other side of a hut walked MYalu as if he had come
from a different direction. In the open gate of the
royal enclosure sat a muscular young man upon his
haunches, tending the royal fire, which fed hungrily
upon small faggots. Beyond him across the yellow
glare upon the cleared ground beneath a thatched
awning, stood an idol of wood, whose lopsided mouth
snarled beneath a bridgeless nose; narrow slits for
eyes squinted; baby arms stuck down beside triangular
breasts above a melon belly having a protuberant navel
like a small cucumber&mdash;the incarnation of the Snake-god,
Usakuma.</p>

<p>Without the palisade of the sacred ground was a
taller one, barring the doings of the council of witch-doctors
and chiefs from the lay public, who were
confined to their own huts under the penalty of a
hideous death, or an enormous fine, as the witch-doctors
should decide.</p>

<p>To the rear of the idol, cross-legged against the wall
of the entrance to the conical hut, were the musicians
beating a monotonous rhythm upon big and small
drums and twanging a primitive lyre of five strings.
Just as Marufa and MYalu took their respective places
without among the wizards and the chiefs, a young
goat skipped into the open and stared inquisitively at
the Keeper of the Fires. As the man waved the
animal back from the sacred ground, the goat lowered
its head and threatened to charge, suddenly recollected
its mate lying in the shade a few feet away, and began
to bleat absent-mindedly.</p>

<p>Gravely and silently sat the assembly: continuously
throbbed the drums. The sun beat diagonally. As a
<pb n="30"/><anchor id="Pg30"/>
lizard darted like a flash of a prism from the grass
palisade, the band ceased. A man emerged from
behind the idol. Although the grey woolly tufts upon
his chin, the sacred snake skin around his waist above
the cat skin loin-cloth, the jingle of the ivory bangles
on arms and ankles, and his stature, imparted an air of
barbaric royalty, King MFunya MPopo advanced with
the manner of a pariah dog ordered to his master&rsquo;s side.</p>

<p>As the King approached, the Keeper of the Fires
hastily threw on a handful of faggots and bowed his
head. In the centre of the opening of the enclosure
the King squatted down with his back to the fire which
streamed blue smoke. Not a limb or a muscle moved
among the group of wizards and chiefs in the council
house. Attracted by the movement, the goat stopped
bleating and stared at the King; then, putting down
its head, charged him.</p>

<p>With a horrified click, the Keeper of the Fires
sprang. But he was not swift enough to prevent the
impact of the animal&rsquo;s horns with the royal arm thrust
out in self-defence. Three young chiefs came running;
one caught up the goat and carried it away bleating
bellicosely; the others knelt, and while one carefully
collected a gout of blood upon the King&rsquo;s forearm in a
piece of banana leaf, his companion wiped the wound.
When they were satisfied that the bleeding had ceased,
the pieces were meticulously wrapped in another
leaf and borne away by the Keeper of the Fires to be
deposited in the temple: for as every man knows, the
royal blood must not be spilt upon the ground lest the
site be accursed for ever and like the tooth of the dragon
of Colchis, arise from the spot ghostly warriors to
annihilate the tribe.</p>
<pb n="31"/><anchor id="Pg31"/>

<p>Neither upon the face of any of the elders nor upon
the features of MFunya MPopo, the King, had a
muscle moved. Yet the incident was regarded as an
evil omen.&hellip; Then suddenly did Bakahenzie, the
chief witch-doctor, plumed with a tall scarlet feather in
addition to the green ones and a necklace of finger bones
upon his bronze chest, who sat in the centre with Kawa
Kendi, the King&rsquo;s son upon his right, and Zalu Zako,
the grandson, upon his left, begin to chant in a high
wailing voice to the rapid rhythm of the drums:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Is there not a shadow come over the land?</l>
  <l>The frown of the One-not-to-be-mentioned?</l>
  <l>I, Bakahenzie, have seen it! have seen it!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>And from the group within the council house,
immobile, came the bass chorus of assent:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 17" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Ough! Ough!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Is there not a dry curse come over the land?</l>
  <l>Is it not the hot breath of the soul of the Snake?</l>
  <l>I, Bakahenzie, have seen it! have seen it!&rdquo;</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">&ldquo;Ough! Ough!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Where is the false spirit that hath sinned in the act?</l>
  <l>He that hath sinned in the shade of the name?</l>
  <l>I, Bakahenzie, have seen him! have seen him!&rdquo;</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">&ldquo;Ough! Ough!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Does not the keen sting of him scorch up the land?</l>
  <l>Hath not the young bread of our bellies been slain?</l>
  <l>I, Bakahenzie, have seen it! have seen it!&rdquo;</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">&ldquo;Ough! Ough!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>The throb of the drums grew faster. Bakahenzie
<pb n="32"/><anchor id="Pg32"/>
leaped from the crowd. Immediately in front of the
King he began to dance and to scream:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Is the Burden too great for the Guard of the Name?</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aie! Aie!</l>
  <l>Hath the Bearer, too, fumbled the weight of the World?</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aie! Aie!</l>
  <l>Is His spirit bewitched by the soul of a girl?</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aie! Aie!</l>
  <l>Hath His magical power been slain by the sin?</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aie! Aie!</l>
  <l>Hath a prophet made words in the act of a goat?</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aie! Aie!</l>
  <l>Does a saviour in hairs thirst the blood of a King?</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aie! Aie!</l>
  <l>Shall we hearken, O Chiefs, to the wish of the One?</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aie! Aie!</l>
  <l>Or be shrivelled and die in the drought of His wrath?</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aie! Aie!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>Kawa Kendi, a man in early middle age, powerful
and lithe-limbed, sat as motionless as the King, his
father, staring, as did all, with the fixed stare of the
anagogic.</p>

<p>Abruptly the drums ceased. Again came a hot
silence as Bakahenzie paused in front of MFunya
MPopo. Then with a piercing yell, the witch-doctor
spun on his toes. The drums broke into an hysterical
rhythm. Bakahenzie leaped high in the air; whirled
around and around screaming hoarsely; leaped and
spun continually.</p>

<p>The chiefs and doctors began to grunt; continued in
<pb n="33"/><anchor id="Pg33"/>
crescendo until the whole body throbbed and grunted
to the rhythm of the drums. Yet immobile sat
MFunya MPopo.</p>

<p>Suddenly Bakahenzie changed the erratic course of
his wild dance. He whirled and screamed in front of
the King and fell headlong, as if in a fit, with eyes
injected and foam upon the black tufts of beard.
Bakahenzie clutched his belly and began to howl like a
hyena at the moon. The drums stopped. Howl and
writhe did Bakahenzie as if a thousand fiends were
tearing out his entrails.</p>

<p>He lay rigid. The air seemed to quiver. The lines
of every man&rsquo;s limbs, except the King&rsquo;s, were drawn in
tension. Then from the prostrate body of the witch-doctor,
whose legs and arms were twisted as in agony,
whose dribbling mouth was closed like a vise, came a
ventriloquous falsetto:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Aie-e! Aie-e! I am the spirit of Kintu!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! I am he who first was!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! I am the banana from whom I was made!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! The Keeper of the Name hath betrayed me!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! The Bride of me is defiled!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! Let him arise who is pure!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! Let him arise who is bidden!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! Let the fires be put out!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! Let a new fire arise from the ashes!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! I have spoken, I, the Father of men!</l>
  <l>Aie-e! Aie-e! I, Tarum, the soul of your
  ancestors!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>
<pb n="34"/><anchor id="Pg34"/>

<p>From the assembly came the belly grunt of acceptance.
In silence rose Kawa Kendi, the heir-apparent.
His face was as expressionless as his father&rsquo;s. He
stepped around the body of Bakahenzie and across the
open space followed by a young man, Kingata Mata.
Ten feet away from the enclosure, Kingata Mata sank
upon his haunches. Before MFunya MPopo squatted
his son. They spat each in the other&rsquo;s hand and
swallowed the spittle. Then the head of Kawa Kendi
bent to the lips of MFunya MPopo to receive the
sacred Name.</p>

<p>In unison with Kawa Kendi rose Kingata Mata, who
to him handed a cord of twisted bark. Bending behind
the King, who remained motionless with the closed
eyes of one already dead, Kingata Mata swiftly adjusted
the cord and handed it back to the son, Kawa
Kendi.&hellip;</p>

<p>When the muscular young Keeper of the Fires had
poured solemnly a gourd of water upon the royal fire
of MFunya MPopo, he knelt submissively and was
strangled beside his master.&hellip;</p>

<p>From the assembly went up a great shout:</p>

<p><q>The fire is put out!</q></p>

<p>And from the village, listening in awe to the mighty
doings, came like an echo:</p>

<p><q>The fire is put out! Aie! Aie-e!</q></p>

<p>Then shouted the elders and wizards:</p>

<p><q>Let there be a new fire!</q></p>

<p>Again came the wailing repetition from the
village:</p>

<p><q>Let there be a new fire!</q></p>

<p>As in the Place of Fires was kindled a new fire by
Kingata Mata with two sacred sticks, one of which is
<pb n="35"/><anchor id="Pg35"/>
male and the other female, the assembled chiefs and
magicians groaned in allegiance to the new King-God
of the unmentionable spirit of the Snake, Usakuma,
the Idol.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD03" type="chapter">
<pb n="36"/><anchor id="Pg36"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 3</hi>
</head>

<p>At five-thirty zu Pfeiffer was stretched in the long
Bombay chair in the coolest portion of the screened
verandah. On the table beside him was a tall glass,
a decanter of cognac and a box of cigars; and suspended
from the roof swung a canvas bag of water with
a syphon attachment. A gape fly, which somehow had
gotten through the screen, hit the lieutenant&rsquo;s forehead,
fell on to the book and whirred up against the
wire.</p>

<p><q>Ach, Gott verdammt!</q> exclaimed zu Pfeiffer
irritably and shouted: <q>Ho, Bakunja&mdash;la.</q> Instantly
appeared the tall negro in white. <q>You son of a god!
Look at that!</q></p>

<p>Bakunjala looked, leaped, and caught the fly in his
hand.</p>

<p><q>Ow!</q> he exclaimed as the hornet stung him.</p>

<p><q>Ach, you woman of shame, catch it instantly!</q></p>

<p>Without hesitation Bakunjala made another grab,
and clutching the fly tightly, made to open the screen
door.</p>

<p><q>Halt!</q> commanded the lieutenant.</p>

<p>Bakunjala obeyed.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer regarded the man standing with the wasp
sting buried in his palm with a slight smile of amusement.</p>

<p><q>It hurts?</q> he inquired amiably.</p>

<p><q>Indio, Bwana!</q> asserted Bakunjala.</p>
<pb n="37"/><anchor id="Pg37"/>

<p><q>Good! Now stop there.</q></p>

<p>Motionless remained the negro. Zu Pfeiffer leisurely
selected a fresh cigar, lighted it, stoked it, and
inhaling smoke stroked his left moustache.</p>

<p><q>It still hurts?</q></p>

<p><q>Indio, Bwana!</q> said Bakunjala with a high note
in his voice.</p>

<p><q>Splendid!</q> assured the lieutenant: and after a
full minute added: <q>Now you may go. And remember
if you are frightened of a fly&rsquo;s pain again I will
give you twenty lashes.</q></p>

<p><q>Indio, Bwana,</q> answered Bakunjala humbly and
departed swiftly with the hornet in his clenched fist.
Zu Pfeiffer smiled, again stared reflectively at the
violet shadows creeping lazily across the square, sipped
some brandy and picking up his book, began to read.&hellip;</p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer frowned and looked round. Outside the
screen stood Sergeant Schultz at the salute. Zu
Pfeiffer nodded.</p>

<p><q>Well?</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence,</q> said the sergeant at attention, <q>the
Englishman is here.</q></p>

<p><q>Ach, tell him to go&qdash;</q> The lieutenant drew
out his gold chronometer. <q>It is my bath time. I
cannot see him.</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Wait.</q> Zu Pfeiffer withdrew his legs and rose.
<q>Ach, tell the fool to come over here and wait till I
have had my bath.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q> agreed the sergeant and saluting,
marched away. Zu Pfeiffer entered the bungalow.
Across the square came Birnier with the sergeant who
<pb n="38"/><anchor id="Pg38"/>
ushered him into the screened portion of the verandah.</p>

<p><q>His Excellence gom bresently,</q> said the sergeant
and left him.</p>

<p>Birnier put his Tirai hat on the table, and seeing no
other, sat in the Bombay chair; looked about him;
idly examined the brand on the box of cigars and
smiled. <q>Makes himself mighty comfortable,</q> he
remarked to himself. <q>Pity he appears such a boor.</q>
He glanced at the book on the armchair.
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Allgemeine
Geschichte der Philosophie</hi> von Prof. Dr. Paul Deussen.
<q>And a philosopher, eh!</q> Having little German he
turned away and lighted his pipe. After a while he
began to fidget, wondering how long he was to be kept
waiting. <q>Damn the fellow!</q> he muttered and
picked up one of the books on the table,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Les Ba-Rongas</hi>,
par A. Junod, opened it at random and began to
read.</p>

<p>The shadows of one bungalow reached the verandah
on the opposite side of the square. And still he read on,
the dead pipe in his hand. Just as the twilight was
snuffed out like a candle, a sharp step heralded the
arrival of the lieutenant. Birnier rose, the book in his
hand.</p>

<p><q>Good evening, sir!</q></p>

<p><q>Good evening,</q> responded zu Pfeiffer, who was in
an undress uniform of white. <q>What is it that you
require?</q></p>

<p><q>Well,</q> said Birnier, <q>first of all I must apologise
for using your chair and reading your book. Most
interesting, by the way.</q></p>

<p><q>That is nothing,</q> said zu Pfeiffer as Bakunjala
came in with a lamp and a chair. <q>Please to be
seated.</q></p>
<pb n="39"/><anchor id="Pg39"/>

<p><q>Thank you.</q></p>

<p>Birnier took the small chair and the lieutenant the
Bombay.</p>

<p><q>I&mdash;er I&mdash;am sorry that I disturbed you this
morning,</q> began Birnier diffidently. <q>But I did not
know&qdash;</q></p>

<p><q>That is nothing. It was the fault of the sentry.
He should not have allowed you to pass.</q></p>

<p><q>Regarding my application for the licence, Herr
Lieutenant?</q></p>

<p><q>I regret,</q> said zu Pfeiffer coldly, using a cigar
cutter, <q>that I am unable to grant you the licence
you ask.</q></p>

<p><q>You cannot grant me a trading or shooting
licence?</q></p>

<p><q>I regret, no.</q></p>

<p>Birnier stared.</p>

<p><q>May I inquire why I am refused?</q></p>

<p><q>You may. We do not wish undesirables in the
country.</q></p>

<p><q>Undesirables!</q> Birnier&rsquo;s lips tightened. <q>I am
afraid that I do not understand you.</q> The lieutenant
was engaged in carefully stoking his cigar. <q>Will you
kindly afford me a reason for&mdash;for such an insulting
remark?</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer blew smoke luxuriously. Birnier stared
for a moment, stuck his pipe in his mouth and bit the
stem; removed it and snapped:</p>

<p><q>You can have no adequate reason for such action.&hellip;
If you intend to continue this ridiculous farce
I shall be compelled to make a complaint through
Washington.</q></p>

<p><q>Washington?</q> Zu Pfeiffer removed one leg
<pb n="40"/><anchor id="Pg40"/>
from the chair-rest and the cigar from his mouth.
<q>You are an American?</q></p>

<p><q>I am.</q></p>

<p><q>So? We understood that you were an English
agent. You have papers?</q></p>

<p><q>Certainly. If you wish&qdash;</q></p>

<p><q>We do not demand. No. My agent was wrong.
He shall be punished.</q> Then in an amiable voice:
<q>I, too, have been a long time in America. Please
to have a cigar, Mr. Birnier.</q></p>

<p>Birnier hesitated, puzzled.</p>

<p><q>Thank you,</q> he said diffidently, selected one,
bit off the end and spat it into the corner. Zu
Pfeiffer shuddered delicately; but as Birnier lighted
his cigar he studied his face in the glow of the
match; noted the breadth of the jaw, the width
between the eyes and the slightly hard line at the corner
of the mouth.</p>

<p><q>And forgive me!</q> Zu Pfeiffer shouted to Bakunjala.
<q>I presume that you have been in Africa a long
time,</q> he continued.</p>

<p><q>Some ten years.</q></p>

<p><q>You do find the Wongolo country interesting?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, yes.</q></p>

<p><q>You were there long?</q></p>

<p><q>No, I had been two years in the Congo and passed
through on my way to Uganda to refit.</q></p>

<p><q>Ach. You permit me? You are mining?</q></p>

<p><q>No.</q> Birnier smiled thinly. <q>I have a professorial
job in the American Museum of Natural History,
Anthropological department.</q></p>

<p><q>Professor! Ach!</q> Zu Pfeiffer looked at him
interestedly.</p>
<pb n="41"/><anchor id="Pg41"/>

<p><q>Yes. That is why I was so absorbed in
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Les Ba-Rongas</hi>
which I found here. You are interested in
anthropology?</q></p>

<p><q>Ach, yes, I love to study the animals. I have a
library&mdash;a small one, here. You must see it.</q></p>

<p><q>Thank you.</q></p>

<p><q>You were studying the animals&rsquo; ways and how
d&rsquo;you call it?&mdash;das Volksk&uuml;ndliches&mdash;in Wongolo?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes. I do nothing else.</q></p>

<p><q>So?</q> Bakunjala arrived with fresh glasses and
vermouth. <q>Which do you prefer, French or Italian,
Herr Professor?</q></p>

<p><q>French, please.</q></p>

<p><q>You will dine with me, please?</q></p>

<p><q>That is very kind of you, Lieutenant.</q> Birnier
gazed quizzically, rather amused at the complete
change of manner. Quite charming when he likes,
he reflected.</p>

<p><q>From what part do you come, Herr Professor?</q>
inquired zu Pfeiffer as he set down his glass.</p>

<p><q>Oh, I&rsquo;m a Southerner. Louisiana. My name is
French, you know.</q></p>

<p><q>Ach so? Che les aimes, les Fran&ccedil;ais. Les femmes
sont adorables!</q></p>

<p><q>Oui, je les trouve comme &ccedil;a!</q> agreed Birnier,
smiling. <q>Ma femme est fran&ccedil;aise.</q></p>

<p><q>So? &hellip; I, too, Professor, I am in love with a
Fran&ccedil;aise. She is wonderful! superbe! Ach, ent
z&uuml;ckend!</q> The lieutenant gazed into the warm
darkness. <q>Always I see her&mdash;in the darkness,
the&mdash;chaleur&mdash;parmis
les animaux.</q> In the glow of the
lamp, the blue eyes were soft, the feminine lips curved
in a tender smile as he murmured:</p>
<pb n="42"/><anchor id="Pg42"/>

<lg rend="margin-left: 5" type="song">
  <l>&ldquo;Die Jahre kommen und gehen,</l>
  <l>Geschlechter steigen ins Grab,</l>
  <l>Doch nimmer vergeht die Liebe,</l>
  <l>Die ich im Herzen hab!</l>
  <l>Nur einmal noch m&ouml;cht ich dich sehen,</l>
  <l>Und sinken vor dir aufs Knie</l>
  <l>Und sterbend zu dir sprechen:</l>
  <l>&lsquo;Madam, ich liebe Sie!&rsquo;&thinsp;&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p><q>Thank you,</q> said Birnier quietly. <q>I, too,
would say that.</q></p>

<p><q>Ach, sprechen Sie Deutsch?</q> demanded zu
Pfeiffer quickly.</p>

<p><q>No, unfortunately I don&rsquo;t speak it, but I understand
a little; and particularly Heine.</q></p>

<p><q>Ach, Gott!</q></p>

<p>The note was of satisfaction. A gong sounded.
Zu Pfeiffer turned sharply: <q>Come, Herr Professor,
let us go to dinner. You would wish to
wash?</q></p>

<p>The bungalow, unusually lofty, was divided into
three compartments. The ceiling, made of stout
white calico, to shelter from snakes and the continual
dust from the wood borers, was suspended from the
rafters like the roof of a marquee tent. The centre
room was furnished with cane lounge chairs like a
smoking-room and decorated with skins, native musical
instruments, spears and shields; drums served as small
tables with elephant&rsquo;s toe-nails for ash trays.</p>

<p>In the bedroom was a brass bedstead and mosquito
net. Behind was a bathroom having a corrugated
cistern upon the cross beams which gave force for a
shower. The towels and appointments were specklessly
<pb n="43"/><anchor id="Pg43"/>
clean. When Birnier appeared he found zu
Pfeiffer sprawled in the lounge. On a red lacquer
tray upon a great war drum, covered with the striped
skin of a zebra, was a crystal liqueur set and a large
silver box of Egyptian cigarettes.</p>

<p><q>Ach, Professor,</q> said he, <q>it is good to speak to a
white man again</q> (by which he meant an equal).
<q>Please be seated, I beg you. A little liqueur is good
for the aperitif and a cigarette; for there is no time for
another cigar.</q></p>

<p>As Birnier sat he remarked the blonde head of the
lieutenant in his meticulous uniform touched with gold
and caught a glimpse of the jewelled bracelet of ivory
and the Chinese finger-nail.</p>

<p>Another summons of the gong brought zu Pfeiffer to
his feet. As he led his guest out through the side
verandah along a screened porch to the mess room,
built away from the main building to keep away the
plague of flies, a native girl whose close-wrapped white
robes revealed a lithe figure, flitted through a doorway.
The table was set in immaculate linen, aglitter with
glass and decorated with a profusion of wild orchids.
Behind the chairs stood two negroes in spotless white,
immobile. On each plate were hors d&rsquo;&oelig;uvres of
anchovy and cheese upon a patterned piece of toast.
Salted almonds, sweets, and olives were in green china;
wine glasses of three kinds. Broiled fish followed the
soup.</p>

<p><q>So, Professor,</q> remarked the lieutenant, <q>you
will go back some day to Wongolo?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I&mdash;unless I discover some tribe who have a
more interesting system of&mdash;er&mdash;theology.</q></p>

<p><q>They are a powerful tribe, nicht wahr?</q></p>
<pb n="44"/><anchor id="Pg44"/>

<p><q>Oh yes, very. Their system ensures unity which
provides for concerted action. Here I believe it is
different.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, yes; they are poor here. Each village was
at war with the other&mdash;before we came. Their
superstitions are not&mdash;how would you say it?</q></p>

<p><q>Systematised?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes. They have neither any supreme chief nor
god. There you see,</q> he added, smiling, <q>that
autocracy is the only form of government. Democracy&mdash;pah! &hellip;
I apologise, Professor!</q></p>

<p><q>Please don&rsquo;t,</q> replied Birnier, <q>although of course
I cannot agree with you.</q></p>

<p><q>But the Wongolo, they have a god and king?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, the King-Priest system. One of the most
interesting I have ever encountered or read of.</q></p>

<p><q>You did see the King-God, MFunya MPopo?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh no. He is forbidden to be seen by a foreigner&mdash;a
similar law to that of the Medes; only by the witch-doctors&mdash;and
by the people once a year at a harvest
festival. That is why I intend to go back. It is
impossible to procure reliable statistics of their customs,
practices and real beliefs without&mdash;without winning
their confidence. That is my mission.</q></p>

<p><q>I do not longer wonder, Herr Professor, that you
were most justly annoyed. Ach, yes. But please do
not worry about your ridiculous licence. It is not
necessary in my jurisdiction, I assure you. You may
come and go as you please, shoot what you wish. I
will always be so glad to help so distinguished a professor.</q></p>

<p><q>I thank you very much.</q></p>

<p><q>It is nothing. And perhaps when you are there,
<pb n="45"/><anchor id="Pg45"/>
you will be so kind as to write to me? To tell me
things that are not known&mdash;so that I may, too,
continue to study the animals&mdash;again what is it?
das Volksk&uuml;ndliches?</q></p>

<p><q>Folk-lore, isn&rsquo;t it?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes. Please to have some more wine, Herr
Professor. Please, I insist. It is the real Mumm.
That is a promise? I thank you<corr sic=","><anchor id="E33"/><ref
target="e33">.</ref></corr> And if&qdash; Were
there any others&mdash;whites&mdash;when you were there?</q></p>

<p><q>Only one.</q></p>

<p><q>Where was he, I wonder?</q></p>

<p><q>On the southern boundary.</q></p>

<p><q>Near lake Kivu?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes.</q></p>

<p><q>Saunders,</q> muttered zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p><q>I beg your pardon?</q></p>

<p><q>It was nothing, but I do not like to have&mdash;aliens
in my province. They are&mdash;missionaries and traders&mdash;spies.</q></p>

<p><q>Indeed.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, it is always so. Herr Professor, I ask you a
favour. Will you be so kind as to write to me if some
other white comes into the Wongolo country?</q></p>

<p><q>I shall be delighted,</q> said Birnier.&hellip; <q>Do
you intend to come there some day, Herr Lieutenant?</q></p>

<p><q>Ach, no, it is not&mdash;not our territory; although I
should very much like to see it and to shoot. There
is much elephant there?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh yes, quantities.</q></p>

<p><q>Please to try some of this curried egg, Herr Professor.
It is excellent, I assure you. I thank you.&hellip;
And rubber, is there much rubber there?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I believe so.</q></p>
<pb n="46"/><anchor id="Pg46"/>

<p><q>Now I wonder if you noticed whether it was tree
or vine?</q></p>

<p><q>I really couldn&rsquo;t say.</q> Birnier smiled thinly.
<q>I am not interested in such things.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer glanced at him keenly and changed the
subject. When they had finished the best boned
chicken that Birnier had ever tasted in Africa, zu
Pfeiffer rose.</p>

<p><q>Let us go to my study, Herr Professor, if you
so permit, for some coffee and a little good port&mdash;and
I will have the pleasure to show you my little
library.</q></p>

<p><q>I should be delighted,</q> assented Birnier willingly.</p>

<p>Around the white walls of the cool room which was
zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s study, ran low bookshelves made of native
wood, containing some hundreds of volumes which had
been carried five hundred miles on the heads of porters.
Grass mats and leopard skins were upon the floor. In
the centre, upon a heavy table, was a green shaded
lamp set in a silver-mounted elephant&rsquo;s foot. Upon
the bookcases were various odd curios, and a coffee
service in copper; and from opposite sides, marbles of
Bismarck and Voltaire stared into each other&rsquo;s eyes.
On the south wall was a large oil of Kaiser Wilhelm II;
and in the centre of the other wall a photograph of a
woman set in an ivory frame made from a section of a
tusk.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer strove to be more agreeable than ever.
They talked mythology and folklore. With the port,
zu Pfeiffer rose, an erect martial figure above the glow
of the lamp.</p>

<p><q>Herr Professor!</q> he remarked. <q>I beg you.</q></p>

<p>Slightly bewildered, Birnier rose, too, glass in hand.
<pb n="47"/><anchor id="Pg47"/>
Wheeling with military precision zu Pfeiffer raised his
glass to the great portrait on the wall.</p>

<p><q>Ihre Hochheit!</q></p>

<p>Politely Birnier followed suit, his democratic ideas
slightly astonished at the veneration of the kingly
office; almost, he reflected, as curious as the native
superstition of the King-God. Then zu Pfeiffer turned
to the left and lifting his glass to the portrait in the
ivory frame, drank silently.</p>

<p><q>I was wondering, Professor,</q> remarked he, as he
resumed his seat without explanation, <q>from what
college&mdash;you call it?&mdash;you come?</q></p>

<p><q>Harvard,</q> said Birnier, rather amused and noticing
that as a true connoisseur, zu Pfeiffer refrained from
smoking while drinking his port.</p>

<p><q>I have met many of the Harvard men&mdash;at Washington.</q></p>

<p><q>Ah, you know Washington?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, I was there nearly two years.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer drained his port, selected a cigar, lighted
it and gazed abstractedly towards the ivory frame. The
lips softened and he smiled gently.</p>

<p><q>Do you know many people there?</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, a few.</q></p>

<p><q>Ach &hellip; I wonder.&hellip; You must know that
I met her there, my divine Lucille!</q></p>

<p><q>Lucille! How strange! That is my wife&rsquo;s name
too.</q></p>

<p><q>Really?</q> Zu Pfeiffer still peered dreamily at the
corner. He gathered up his legs and rose like an eager
boy. <q>Permit me, Herr Professor, she is so&mdash;so&qdash;</q>
He bent over the portrait and struck a match. Politely
Birnier stooped to look. He saw a portrait of a French
<pb n="48"/><anchor id="Pg48"/>
woman in an evening gown, a woman of charm with
the vivacious eyes and tempting mouth of the coquette.</p>

<p><q>My God!</q></p>

<p>Birnier bent closer and stared intently. Across the
corner of the photograph were written in ink in familiar
characters the words: &lsquo;&agrave; toi, Lucille.&rsquo;</p>

<p><q>Lucille!</q> he gasped. <q>Lu&mdash;Good God!</q> He
stood up abruptly. <q>I&mdash;What in God&rsquo;s name&mdash;who
is this woman?</q></p>

<p>The match fell to the floor. He was vaguely conscious
of the tall white figure stiffening as a dog does.</p>

<p><q>That lady is my fianc&eacute;e.</q></p>

<p><q>Fianc&eacute;e! She&mdash;Good God, you&rsquo;re mad! She
is my wife!</q></p>

<p><q>Wife!&hellip; Gott verdampf, der Teufel solls
holen! Das ist der Schweinh&uuml;nd!</q></p>

<p>The gutturals exploded from zu Pfeiffer. The
sleeve of his white jacket quivered, the arm came up to
the gold braided chest and jerked out a silver whistle.
He hesitated, glaring at the astonished figure of Birnier.
Suddenly zu Pfeiffer sat down by the table. His blue
eyes were as hard as malachite.</p>

<p><q>Sit down!</q> he commanded harshly.</p>

<p>Birnier did not appear to notice him. He struck a
match and bent over the photograph again.</p>

<p><q>Good God!</q> he muttered.
<q>I&mdash;I&mdash;don&rsquo;t understand&mdash;O
God!</q></p>

<p><q>Sit down!</q> shouted zu Pfeiffer. Birnier merely
blinked at him.</p>

<p><q>Would you mind explaining?</q> demanded Birnier.</p>

<p><q>Explain!&hellip; Is your wife Mademoiselle Lucille
Charltrain?</q></p>

<p><q>Why, of course. That is her professional name.
<pb n="49"/><anchor id="Pg49"/>
But how on earth has this mistake happened? I&mdash;I&mdash;that
is her writing&mdash;but it can&rsquo;t be. I mean it&rsquo;s
impossible.&hellip;</q>
Birnier put his hand to his head. <q>I&mdash;God,
it can&rsquo;t be! I or you must be mad! Which is&qdash;</q></p>

<p>A prolonged whistle startled him. He saw the
whistle at zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s lips, but the act conveyed no
meaning. He turned away, struck another match and
peered again at the photograph.</p>

<p><q>Lucille! Lucille!</q> he whispered. <q>What on
earth&qdash;</q></p>

<p>A powerful clutch closed upon his arm. He was
whirled backwards into a chair. For a moment he
was too dazed to grasp what had happened. He
saw zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s face. The sentries over his moustaches
quivered like a row of fixed bayonets. The eyes seemed
needle points. Then the fact of the assault penetrated
beyond the unprecedented incident of finding his
wife&rsquo;s photograph in another man&rsquo;s room. The ugly
line about the mouth hardened. He rose slowly.</p>

<p><q>Am I to understand that you have laid your hands
upon your guest?</q> he began, stuttering over the
choice of words. <q>I am&mdash;I am&qdash;</q></p>

<p>The scuffle of many feet interrupted him. Into the
room rushed Sergeant Schultz and several soldiers.
Zu Pfeiffer stood up and pointed.</p>

<p><q>Sergeant, arrest that man!</q> he barked.</p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence!</q></p>

<p>The sergeant saluted and barked at the askaris.
Birnier gazed stupidly at the uniforms around him as
if unable to comprehend. He looked at zu Pfeiffer
who stood erect, his face lost in shadow above the lamp,
and back at the soldiers.</p>
<pb n="50"/><anchor id="Pg50"/>

<p><q>Is this a joke, Lieutenant&mdash;or are you mad?</q>
he demanded angrily.</p>

<p><q>Sergeant, put that man in the guard-room,</q> zu
Pfeiffer commanded.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer sat down with his back to Birnier and
facing the photograph. Birnier&rsquo;s face twitched; he
raised his arm. The sergeant barked and the line of
bayonets lowered menacingly.</p>

<p><q>You gom with me, Herr American,</q> ordered the
sergeant.</p>

<p>Birnier controlled himself.</p>

<p><q>One moment, sergeant, please! Herr Lieutenant,
on what charge do you arrest me?</q> The perfect
lines of the white-clad back did not quiver. <q>Very
good! I give you warning, Herr Lieutenant, that
you have committed an assault upon an American
citizen.</q></p>

<p><q>Gom! Gom!</q> insisted the sergeant impatiently.</p>

<p>Birnier raised his head and walked as indicated by
the sergeant. As the footsteps plodded across the
square zu Pfeiffer turned to the table, examining his
left hand.</p>

<p><q>Ach!</q> he growled gutturally, <q>the dirty pig has
broken my nail!</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD04" type="chapter">
<pb n="51"/><anchor id="Pg51"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 4</hi>
</head>

<p>Over the city of the Snake the sun sank red dry,
leaving the Place of Kings hot in the electric air
of magic and world happenings. The people were
still confined to their huts, trembling in the knowledge
that for three days love must be eschewed, no water
drawn nor any food cooked with fire; nor might any
man, woman or child leave the precincts of the
compound.</p>

<p>All the night Bakuma crouched in her hut listening
in awe to the swish of the ghosts through the air, to
the moans, groans and howls of the wizards doing
battle with them. Tightly did she hold the amulet as
she strove to conceal curiosity regarding the welfare
of Zalu Zako; for did her mother suspect the presence
of this evil spirit would she cause Bakuma to
take a decoction of the castor-oil plant in order that
the demon might be expelled; and the more to aid
her conquer this unlawful impulse to peep without did
she most persistently recite to herself the fate of the
daughter of MTasa, the foolish Tangulbala whose
body had been discovered impaled upon a tree by
the angry spirits of the dead, because she had rashly
ventured forth the third day after the death of the
grandfather of Zalu Zako. Bakuma dared not mention
the name of one who had died, for, as everybody
knows, such an impious person runs the risk of summoning
the ghosts to their presence.</p>
<pb n="52"/><anchor id="Pg52"/>

<p>The <q>putting out of the fire</q> had changed Bakuma&rsquo;s
prospects, had made Zalu Zako heir-apparent, implying
half a hundred responsibilities, the chief of which was
that now he was compelled to choose his official first
wife, she who would be the mother of the <q>divine</q>
Son of the Snake: an alteration that excited Bakuma
to frantic clutching at the amulet. Would the charm
work or would it not? How to insure that it would be
efficacious? Marufa&rsquo;s greedy demands worried her.
She feared even if she obtained the goat that he might
require something else as well. Anybody knows
how greedy doctors are and how wealthy. He would
be sure to increase the fee, knowing the value of the
prize. Bakuma only possessed one really valuable
article, and that was a charm against sterility; but
this was the last thing that she wished to part with as
the only possible occurrence that could ever divorce her
from the position of chief wife, once she had won
Zalu Zako, would be failure to provide the male heir.
She was impatient, too, at the delay caused by the
three days&rsquo; tabu. Time was important. Soon she
would be under the ban of the unclean which entailed
the curtailment of her liberty again, and she dreaded
that possibly the charm might grow stale. The
greatest need for speed was MYalu&rsquo;s suit. As her
father was dead she belonged to his brother. Already
MYalu had offered four tusks of ivory and three oxen
for her. Her uncle was lazy, mean, and greedy.
Fortunately he thought that by waiting he could
get double that amount. Yet MYalu might decide
to pay the price demanded. Once Zalu Zako had
selected her as his bride, her uncle dared not accept
any other man&rsquo;s offer, no matter how wealthy he might
<pb n="53"/><anchor id="Pg53"/>
be; besides, the old man would not wish to refuse a
relationship with the heir to the king-godhood.</p>

<p>Again her cousin was sick. The diagnosis of Yabolo,
the wizard, was that her soul had wandered in sleep
down to the river and had been swallowed by a fish.
Yabolo had caught the fish and lured the soul into a
tree, but now he demanded such a big price to restore
the errant soul to the girl that her father, Bakuma&rsquo;s
uncle, would not pay it, so she would surely die; then
they would all have to be exorcised, which inferred
a further loss of relative freedom for another four days.
Indeed with all these actual and possible delays it seemed
to Bakuma that some one had made much magic
against her. Unless she knew who he or she was, how
could she employ the same means to annul the terrible
effects? And more, how could she obtain the wherewithal
to pay the fees of the best doctors? Life was
very complicated to the daughter of Bakala.</p>

<p>Up on the hill of MFunya MPopo had the magicians
been busy all the afternoon after the <q>putting out of
the fire.</q> Zalu Zako and the chiefs also were barred
from the sacred enclosure; for being mere laymen
they could not hope to withstand the evil spirits of the
dead. Even Bakahenzie and the inner circle of the
cult were compelled to employ the most potent
methods of protection to preserve them from being
bewitched or slain outright.</p>

<p>After Bakahenzie, Marufa, Yabolo and two other
master magicians had released the souls of the dead
King by making incisions in the body with a sacred
spear to the thrumming of the drums, the mighty
groaning of the other wizards, and the persistent wailing
of the dead man&rsquo;s wives, the corpse was borne by
<pb n="54"/><anchor id="Pg54"/>
twelve doomed slaves to the temple and there interred
with the gouts of blood shed by the prophetic goat,
the nail parings and hair clippings of his lifetime, and
his personal effects.</p>

<p>Upon the hill of MFunya MPopo, soon to be a temple
and sanctuary, sat Kawa Kendi beside the New Fire
tended by Kingata Mata, facing Zalu Zako, MYalu
and the lay chiefs, while upon his own hill slaves were
tearing down his old hut, erecting a temporary palisade
around the quarters of his wives who were forever
forbidden to him, and beginning the building of the
new temple.</p>

<p>As the violet shadows were creeping from one hut
to another did Bakahenzie and his satellites return
from the ghoulish offices of the dead. Zalu Zako,
the chiefs and magicians arose to the wild beating of
the drums and the wailing chant of the hereditary
troubadour with the five stringed lyre. With Kingata
Mata carrying a brand of the newly lighted sacred
fire, was Kawa Kendi led in procession through the
deserted village to his sacred home.</p>

<p>Under the hard stars set in a dry sapphire, the fire
cast yellow flickers upon the carven features of Kawa
Kendi. In the still heat the distant wailing of the
women from the opposite hill drifted into the continuous
throb of the drums, the plaintive wail of the
singer, and the hysterical groaning of the magicians,
yelling ferociously ever and again to intimidate the
baulked spirits around the magic circle.</p>

<p>Then was a white goat, previously selected from
the flock of Kawa Kendi, slain by Zalu Zako, disembowelled
by Bakahenzie, and the entrails rubbed upon
the brow, the chest and the right arm of the slayer
<pb n="55"/><anchor id="Pg55"/>
of man, a ceremony of purification designed to protect
the royal executioner by appeasing the justly angry
spirits of the dead; to Marufa were given other parts
of the slain beast to smear likewise upon Zalu Zako,
the son; and Yabolo ran screaming with portions to
the quarters of the women of Kawa Kendi: for must
every blood relative be so enchanted lest the vengeful
ghost seek substitute victims.</p>

<p>As a pallid moon rose, as if fearfully, above the deep
ultramarine of the banana fronds, was a magic potion
brewed from certain herbs in enchanted water, with
which the King, Zalu Zako, his son, and the King&rsquo;s
wives were laved. Amid a tempest of screams and
drums rose Kawa Kendi purified, to be driven by
Bakahenzie and the wizards back to the hill of his
father, leaving the assembled lay chiefs squatting
humbly and in dread of the spirits abroad in the night.
While the procession leaped and twirled, screamed and
groaned to the frantic thrum of the drums through the
blue darkness, the magicians ran and pranced through
and around the village, seeking any blasphemer who
dared to look upon sacred things; banging on hut
doors and shaking thatches, the more to terrify the
shrinking inhabitants.</p>

<p>Without the gate of the old enclosure all remained,
except Bakahenzie and the four wizards who encircled
Kawa Kendi and Kingata Mata and hustled them
across the clearing. With his back to the dim form
of the idol stood Kawa Kendi as behind it grouped
the master magicians. From the base Bakahenzie took
two large gourds and gave them into the keeping of
Kingata Mata.</p>

<p>Came an abrupt cessation of the drums and cries.
<pb n="56"/><anchor id="Pg56"/>
The wailing of the women behind the temple died.
The tense air pulsed with electricity. A cock crowed
feebly in the village. Then at a rippling splash of
the drums and the sudden screaming of the wizards,
they began to push the idol. The base had already
been loosened in the earth by the slaves. The idol
began to totter. Louder screeched the magicians;
faster fled the drums. Slowly the idol leaned and
subsided on to the shoulders of Kawa Kendi. Grasping
the mass firmly upon his bent back, he bore the burden
out of the enclosure and down the hill.</p>

<p>Behind his unsteady steps pranced and yelled
the doctors with more prodigious a noise than ever
before as they scourged the King&rsquo;s legs and arms with
cords of fibre. Through the listening village panted
the King. As he gasped slowly up the hill the thrashing
was redoubled. But into the new enclosure the King
staggered, let slide the heavy mass into a hole prepared
for the sacred feet and, gleaming blue points of
sweat in the faint moon, let out a hoarse yell, proving
to the assembly of magicians and chiefs that he was
powerful enough to bear the burden of the world and
moreover that none could wrest his office from him.</p>

<p>No time was given for the incarnation of a god to
recoup from his labours. The motive principle of the
accusation and for the death of the king was the
drought. That only concerned the soul of the tribe
in the person of Bakahenzie. For him and his brothers
of the inner cult, while certain pretensions of power
over the supernatural were for the <q>good of the people,</q>
the truths of magic and divine functions were inviolable.
The person of Kawa Kendi, heretofore merely
one in whom was a potentiality, became after the
<pb n="57"/><anchor id="Pg57"/>
purification and <q>coronation</q> the very incarnation
of the god. Kawa Kendi had crossed from the
comparative safe haven of the potential into divine
activity.</p>

<p>Also there were, as ever, political reasons for the
hastening of the offices of the god. Should the new
King-God fail, as his father had done, to accomplish
the duties of the rainmaker, then, as no precedent had
ever been known for the failure of two kings in succession,
an enemy might accuse Bakahenzie of having
committed some sacrilege which had displeased the
Unmentionable One. Politics and religion are often
inseparable. Therefore, as soon as Zalu Zako had
witnessed the ascent of his father into the dangerous
zone of the gods, was he bidden as the victim apparent,
to produce the sacred rain-making paraphernalia.
From the Keeper of the Fire, Kingata Mata, Zalu Zako
received one of the large gourds, which he deposited at
the feet of his father squatting before the sacred fire,
and retired to his allotted place among the other lay
chiefs. Only Bakahenzie and the four of the inner
cult were permitted within the enclosure.</p>

<p>Fumbling within the pot Kawa Kendi produced a
bundle of twigs tied with banana fibre, which he unbound
and cast into the fire. The herbs smouldered
and sent up a pungent smoke forming a heavy cloud like
some strange blue tree sheltering the form of the idol
against the green sky. Save for the faint wailing of the
distant women there was silence, in which an owl
screeched harshly, a good omen. Little flames flickered.
The smoke grew denser, obliterating the figure
of the King. The drums began to mutter, Bakahenzie
cried out in a loud voice:</p>
<pb n="58"/><anchor id="Pg58"/>

<p><q>O great God, the Unmentionable One! let thy
powers be made manifest!</q></p>

<p>The Keeper of the Fires came forward upon his
hands and thrust the other sacred gourd in front of
the King, a deep one containing water, and a wand
made from a sacred tree which had upon the end a
crook. To the groaning of the magicians, the King
took from the one gourd two stones of quartz and
granite, the male and the female, and spat upon each
one, thus placing part of his royal body upon them;
then did he put them on the ground, and pouring
water, chanted:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Go forth, male spirit, with my ghost in thy hands!</l>
  <l>Go forth, female soul, with my ghost in thy breast!</l>
  <l>Make love together in the shade of great Tarum,</l>
  <l>Of him whom fear of me hath frozen the breath!&rdquo;</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">&ldquo;Ough! Ough!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>grunted the priests and magicians.</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Go forth, male spirit, with my ghost in thy hand!</l>
  <l>Go forth, female soul, with my ghost in thy breast!</l>
  <l>Love one another that the crops of our land</l>
  <l>May marry as well and be as fruitful as thee!&rdquo;</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">&ldquo;Ough! Ough!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Go forth, male spirit, with my ghost in thy hand!</l>
  <l>Go forth, female soul, with my ghost in thy breast!</l>
  <l>Rise high up to heaven and mount on the black back</l>
  <l>Of the bird of the wet wind: poke your hands in his eyes!&rdquo;</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">&ldquo;Ough! Ough!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>
<pb n="59"/><anchor id="Pg59"/>

<p>Save for the distant wailing, there was the silence
of those waiting for a miracle. In the sky, at the back
of the idol, was the paling of dawn. Suddenly, as if
exasperated by the non-obedience of the elements,
Kawa Kendi sprang to his feet, with the magic wand
in his right hand, turned and stared apparently into the
face of the idol. For a full two minutes he stood as
if carven, while the doctors and the chiefs moaned
dismally. Around him like a pall still hovered the
smoke of the magic fire. From the village a cock&rsquo;s
challenge was answered from point to point. Then
shooting out his right hand, Kawa Kendi made
gestures as if hooking something invisible and began
to scream furiously:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Thus do I, the One-not-to-be-mentioned,</l>
  <l>Drag forth from the belly of heaven</l>
  <l>The disobedient One, the lazy One!</l>
  <l>The insolent One who sinneth in sleep!</l>
  <l>The black-snouted One whose udders are choked!</l>
  <l>The womanly One whose nipples are dry!</l>
  <l>The sluttish One who refuseth her milk!</l>
  <l>The gorbellied One whose voice is a wind!</l>
  <l>Come forth, lest I give thee sorrow and pain!</l>
  <l>And make thee to weep the bitterest tears!</l>
  <l>Come forth, lest I tear out thy black bosom!</l>
  <l>Tear out thy guts for a feast unto Tarum!</l>
  <l>Come forth, lest I throw off the yoke of the burden</l>
  <l>Of the Earth and the Sky upon thy sweating black belly!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>In a slight puff of wind, the smoke, lace-edged with
the dawn light, swayed, seeming to twine about the
<pb n="60"/><anchor id="Pg60"/>
figure of the King as he stood with the wand outheld,
as if firmly hooked in the guts of the recalcitrant
elements.</p>

<p>Against the rose of the dawn appeared a dark line
which increased as the magicians and chiefs moaned
and groaned in sympathy with the furious efforts of
the rainmaker, who threatened and pulled with the
magic crook, so that everybody could see that he was
indeed dragging the reluctant clouds from over the
end of the earth. As the dark mass swelled the more
he wrestled and screamed abuse at the dilatory spirit
of the rain.</p>

<p>And behold, within half an hour, great black spirits
sailed across the scarlet sunrise and wept exceeding
bitterly; while from the village went up a great shout
of praise to the triumphant King still prancing and
cursing to such good effect up on the hill.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD05" type="chapter">
<pb n="61"/><anchor id="Pg61"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 5</hi>
</head>

<p>The same vast balloons of sepia rolled over the
lake, vomited a host of liquid ramrods and, after
short intervals of brilliant glare, were succeeded by
others. The gutters of the station were turned into
burbling brooks and the grass plot into a morass.</p>

<p>Behind the screen on the south verandah sat zu
Pfeiffer in his pink silk pyjamas, a scowl upon his brow.
He sipped his caf&eacute; cognac distastefully and inhaled a
cigarette so fiercely that the heat burned his tongue.
He had not slept. Yet the broken nail on the left
little finger had been cut and polished. Half the night
he had sat before the photograph in the ivory frame,
pondering upon, and rehearsing, the past; muttering
aloud to Lucille, sometimes words of love and sometimes
savage curses; wondering what she was doing
and where she was; gritting his teeth at visions which
aroused insane jealousy; calculating what the consequences
of his action would be were he to obey the
impulse that had leaped into his mind in the first
flush of passion. If he were to release the prisoner the
fellow would probably expect an explanation and an
apology which was, of course, out of the question. No,
he must carry out the thing thoroughly without leaving
any chance for the man to make trouble at the coast, or
through the Embassy at Washington; at all costs not
through Washington. For him, Birnier merely existed
as a person whose feelings mattered nothing.</p>
<pb n="62"/><anchor id="Pg62"/>

<p>With the greening of the moon zu Pfeiffer had
retired. As he had lain sleeplessly watching the pallor
of the dawn he had savagely corroborated the decision.
Now the roar of the deluge appeared to him in the
form of an abettor to his plan. He watched the grey
wall of rain with satisfaction, stroking the left sentry
moustache as if to tame the fierce bristles of an outraged
dignity. When he had emerged from the bath,
the pink of his face appeared to have spread to the
whites of his eyes, a fact which Bakunjala had noted
with sullen dread.</p>

<p>Between the storms the sun glared yellow upon the
smoking earth. Across the square squelched zu
Pfeiffer to the orderly room. He grunted at Sergeant
Schultz&rsquo;s greeting and sprawled in the chair. When
Schultz proffered him some official documents he
waved them aside irritably.</p>

<p><q>Bring the prisoner to the Court, sergeant. I will
try him immediately.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q> said the sergeant, saluting. <q>What
charge am I to enter against him, Excellence?</q></p>

<p><q>Arms and liquor running,</q> responded zu Pfeiffer
quickly. <q>I hold papers which prove the case
completely; moreover you will see that Ali ben Hassan
and others are prepared to testify. But&mdash;the charge
will be margined as political: not criminal. Understand,
sergeant?</q></p>

<p><q>Perfectly, Excellence. Ali ben Hassan and the
others have to testify before your Excellence now?</q></p>

<p><q>There will be no need.</q></p>

<p><q>Very good, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>And, sergeant, what is the personnel of the launch
and the prisoner&rsquo;s party?</q></p>
<pb n="63"/><anchor id="Pg63"/>

<p><q>The launch returned immediately to Jinja,
Excellence, as soon as the prisoner had landed.</q></p>

<p><q>Ach, good.</q></p>

<p><q>The prisoner has a considerable battery, equipment
and provisions; a headman and personal servants. He
intended to obtain porters here, Excellence.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer meditated, tapping the desk with a gold
pencil.</p>

<p><q>What is the headman?</q></p>

<p><q>Bambeeba, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Good. And the servants?</q></p>

<p><q>One is a Wongolo youth, the others are mixed
Walegga and Kavirondo.</q></p>

<p><q>Arrest them all and see that none gets away.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p>Schultz saluted and departed. Zu Pfeiffer frowned
at the glare which was suddenly extinguished by falling
water. He lighted a cigar and waited. Presently the
sergeant returned in a waterproof cape, dripping, and
announced that the prisoner was ready. Zu Pfeiffer
gathered up his long legs and marched stiffly into the
Court House adjoining.</p>

<p>Upon a slight dais was a large desk and a cane
armchair beneath the Imperial Eagles and a portrait
of the Kaiser Wilhelm II. Pale, stubble bearded, and
tense eyed with anger, sat Birnier upon a form against
the wall; beside him stood Sergeant Schneider, for it
is not usual etiquette to put a white prisoner in charge
of a black guard. The grizzled sergeant stood stuffy to
attention, which zu Pfeiffer acknowledged. Although
he did not meet Birnier&rsquo;s gaze, he scowled as if he had
expected him to salute the majesty of the judge as
well.</p>
<pb n="64"/><anchor id="Pg64"/>

<p>But as zu Pfeiffer mounted the step to the chair of
justice he looked up at the portrait of the Kaiser,
stopped, and hesitated; then he wheeled abruptly,
and barked:</p>

<p><q>Sergeant, bring the prisoner to the orderly room!</q></p>

<p>In the orderly room Birnier was placed between
Sergeant Schultz at his table and Sergeant Schneider
by the door. Birnier watched zu Pfeiffer intently, but
zu Pfeiffer regarded him icily as if he were a piece of
furniture. Without a word Birnier reached out and
lifted a chair. Sergeant Schneider started forward,
evidently fearing that the prisoner was about to attack
his officer. Birnier said acidly: <q>I merely wish to
sit down.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer scowled again, but he made no objection.
He took up some papers at random and began to peruse
them. Said Birnier sharply:</p>

<p><q>When you have finished with this farce I shall be
obliged if you will kindly explain your insane actions!</q></p>

<p>The tap-tap of a typewriter sounded from another
room. A fly buzzed. Zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s eyelids did not
blink. The sergeants stared woodenly to the front.
Birnier looked from one to the other, bit his lips, and
then exclaimed in exasperation: <q>What in hell do you
mean by this damned nonsense?</q></p>

<p>The tap-tap continued; the fly buzzed irritatedly.
Birnier clenched his fist. But he sat still. Another
storm so darkened the room that zu Pfeiffer could
scarcely have seen the print, but apparently he read on.
The deluge roared, passed, and the glare came as
suddenly. Zu Pfeiffer lifted his head and said in
German:</p>

<p><q>Sergeant, record the opening of the Court.</q></p>
<pb n="65"/><anchor id="Pg65"/>

<p><q>Excellence!</q> assented Sergeant Schultz and
poised his pen ready to write.</p>

<p><q>The prisoner, a Swiss subject&qdash;</q></p>

<p><q>I am American, as I have told you,</q> said Birnier in
leashed anger.</p>

<p><q>A pseudo trader and hunter, named Carl Bornstadt,</q>
continued zu Pfeiffer imperturbably, <q>is
charged under sub-section 79 of section 8 with supplying
guns and liquor to the native subjects of his
Imperial Majesty.</q></p>

<p><q>Good God!</q> began Birnier. But as he realised
zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s purpose and his own position, he closed
his lips tightly.</p>

<p>Methodically the sergeant finished the entries and
waited. Zu Pfeiffer stroked his favourite moustache
and considered. He glanced at Birnier, but without a
vestige of expression and continued:</p>

<p><q>Make a special note, sergeant, that we have reason
to suspect that the prisoner is in the political service of</q>&mdash;a
slight smile flicked the lieutenant&rsquo;s face&mdash;<q>in the
service of the Portuguese, and so under sub-section 109
of section 8, I am referring the case to Dar-es-salaam
for investigation; witnesses, documentary and personal,
to accompany the prisoner. Owing to unusual
pressure of service we are unable to afford the prisoner,
although apparently of European descent, a white
guard; therefore, Sergeant Ludwig will detail a
corporal and six men for the duty.</q></p>

<p>He paused. The sergeant&rsquo;s pen scratched on. Zu
Pfeiffer lighted a cigar and added impersonally:</p>

<p><q>The prisoner and escort will leave to-morrow
morning. Sergeant Schneider, remove the prisoner!</q></p>

<p>Birnier&rsquo;s face was a little paler, the eyes were slightly
<pb n="66"/><anchor id="Pg66"/>
more bloodshot; but he did not attempt to speak. Zu
Pfeiffer rose. The sergeants stood to attention and
saluted. As he left the room towards the Court
House, he smiled with slight satisfaction as the gruff
voice of Sergeant Schneider barked: <q>Prisoner,
shun! Right turn! Quick marrch!</q></p>

<p>But zu Pfeiffer did not remain long in the Court
House. After fidgeting about with papers on the
table and reprimanding Sergeant Schultz because he
had not arranged the next native case to his satisfaction,
he rose abruptly and marched swiftly across
the square in the brilliant glare without his helmet and
into his study. There he straddled a chair and leaned
on the back sucking a dead cigar absent-mindedly. As
he stared at the portrait in the ivory frame, the blue
eyes grew soft and the delicate lips quivered like a child
about to weep. He sighed heavily and then rapping
out an oath, rose violently, overturning the chair,
poured out a half-glass of neat cognac, and drank it
at a gulp. As he neared the Court House the sentry,
turning at the end of his short beat, was so startled at
the proximity of the Kommandant, or incompletely
disciplined, that he became flurried. Zu Pfeiffer
clicked his heels together and haughtily watched the
fumbled efforts to salute. The bolt caught in the
man&rsquo;s tunic. Gold flashed in the sun as the sjambok
descended. Zu Pfeiffer walked on unconcernedly,
leaving a grey weal on the terrified native&rsquo;s face. To
Sergeant Schultz, rigid in the doorway, he snapped an
order to have fifty lashes given to the <q>clumsy dog.</q></p>

<p>Sentences were harsher than usual that morning.
All the native world about him knew that a demon had
taken possession of the Eater-of-men; he was usually
<pb n="67"/><anchor id="Pg67"/>
inhabited by an evil spirit, but this time the demon of
Bakra who, as everybody knows, tears the vitals with
hot claws, making the victim to have fits, to foam at the
mouth, to be quite mad, had entered the white man.
Bakunjala, coming to the Court House with vermouth
and biscuits at eleven o&rsquo;clock, distinctly saw the devil
glaring through zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s eyes, and was so scared
that he let fall the tray, which was the reason that he
also was doomed to have twenty-five lashes that
evening. Even the stolid Sergeant Schultz remarked
that the Herr Lieutenant had gotten a touch of the
sun; but the grizzled Schneider, who came from
Luthuania, opined that the Herr Kommandant had
left his table knife edge uppermost.</p>

<p>When zu Pfeiffer went across to tiffin the hot sun
had dried up the gutters and the plot of grass. He did
not return to the Court House, much to the gratitude
of many innocent and guilty. After drinking more
wine than usual he lay down for the siesta and fell asleep.
But at five he awoke with a mouth like a burnt cooking
pot and the temper of the said devil. He yelled for
Bakunjala, who came, so trembling with fright that he
stuttered. Zu Pfeiffer threw a glass which missed him
and broke a mirror.</p>

<p><q>Another seven years&rsquo; ill luck!</q> shouted zu Pfeiffer,
sitting on the bed in his shirt. He glared at Bakunjala
standing in the door, too terror-stricken to flee,
convinced that he would be blamed for breaking the
glass. <q>You&mdash;you superstitious nigger!</q> yelled zu
Pfeiffer, and added more calmly in Kiswahili: <q>Fetch
me a brandy-soda! Upesi, you son of a baboon!</q></p>

<p><q>Bwana!</q> exclaimed Bakunjala and fled gladly.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer sat and scowled at the scattered pieces of
<pb n="68"/><anchor id="Pg68"/>
mirror until Bakunjala arrived with the drink. An
hour later he emerged in his immaculate undress
uniform and sat on the north verandah, drank vermouth
and smoked cigars, staring out across the flat swamp
where the pewter of the lake was flecked with silver
and blood of the sinking sun. From beyond the fort
came the yaps of the drill-sergeant busy in the cool of
the afternoon. At the bark of the relieving guard,
zu Pfeiffer rose and walked around the house to watch,
with tetchy eyes, the saluting of the flag.</p>

<p>As he stalked off to dinner in the messroom eyes
glimmered in the darkness about him. Bakunjala,
after receiving punishment, was indisposed, in fact
incapable of attending to his duties in the spritely
manner required. Another servant, who had taken his
place, was nervous of the probable consequences, and
had a keen eye for the appearance of the devil so
realistically described by Bakunjala. But the demon
apparently slept, for zu Pfeiffer took the dishes placed
before him with an unaccustomed meekness, pushed
them away absent-mindedly, and rising, retired to his
study. Even when the deputy brought the wrong
bottle he reprimanded him mildly without taking his
eyes off the photograph in the ivory frame.</p>

<p>Yet, with the port, he did not omit to rise, and heels
together, raise his glass to the <q>Ihre Hochheit.</q>
Then sprawling in the chair he began to drink and to
smoke steadily.</p>

<p>As the notes of the last post stuttered out in the
clammy stillness he summoned the <q>boy</q> and bade him
fetch Sergeant Schultz. At the sound of the sergeant&rsquo;s
steps on the verandah zu Pfeiffer stiffened up
and patted his lips as if desiring to erase the lines that
<pb n="69"/><anchor id="Pg69"/>
were graven thereon; and with one foot pushed the
chair from the direct angle to the photograph.</p>

<p><q>Take a cigar,</q> said zu Pfeiffer, when the man had
entered. The words were rather an order than an
invitation. Sergeant Schultz obeyed. Zu Pfeiffer
smoked reflectively, still regarding the photograph out
of the corner of his eyes as if unable to resist the
fascination.</p>

<p><q>How long have you been in this benighted country,
sergeant?</q></p>

<p><q>Nine years, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>You wish to retire on the pension at the year&rsquo;s
term?</q></p>

<p><q>I have not seen my wife and children for three
years, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>You shall have special leave as soon as the Wongolo
affair is over.</q></p>

<p><q>I thank you, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>And I will recommend you for the special colonial
service medal and pension.</q></p>

<p><q>I thank you, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Take a drink, sergeant.</q></p>

<p><q>I thank you, Excellence.</q></p>

<p>The sergeant obeyed with some semblance of
initiative and he remarked that the lieutenant drank
half a tumbler of neat brandy at a gulp. As if to
drag himself away from the contemplation of the
photograph zu Pfeiffer stood up and sat on the
arm of the chair with his face in shadow above the
lamp-shade. Gazing keenly at the sergeant, he said
sharply:</p>

<p><q>You are quite aware of the regulations regarding
official secrets, sergeant?</q></p>
<pb n="70"/><anchor id="Pg70"/>

<p><q>Ach, yes, Excellence!</q></p>

<p>As the sergeant paused to answer with the glass in his
hand there was just a suspicion of astonishment in the
tone.</p>

<p><q>Good. Don&rsquo;t forget it!</q> A note of menace was
in zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s voice. He added more mildly,
<q>Political reasons may cause stringent measures
sometimes.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes, Excellence.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer smoked, coldly regarding the sergeant.</p>

<p><q>Who is Sergeant Schneider detailing for the
prisoner&rsquo;s escort to-morrow?</q></p>

<p><q>Corporal Inyira, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>A long service man?</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Good. Go and fetch him here.</q></p>

<p>Not a shadow of surprise showed on Sergeant
Schultz&rsquo;s face as he departed. Zu Pfeiffer smoked hard
and drank another brandy thirstily with a slight
unsteadiness as he lifted the glass to his mouth. The
sergeant returned and stood at attention just within
the door.</p>

<p><q>The man is here, Excellence.</q> Zu Pfeiffer
nodded.</p>

<p><q>Forward, quick marrch,</q> commanded the sergeant
in a muffled bark. <q>Halttt!</q></p>

<p><q>Very good, sergeant, you may wait.</q></p>

<p>Schultz saluted and retired without. The tall
powerfully built native in uniform stood as if he had a
bayonet beneath his chin. There was a slight nervousness
about the blues of the eyes as he squinted in the
attempt to look straight ahead and to watch the
Kommandant at the same time. One nostril was slit,
<pb n="71"/><anchor id="Pg71"/>
in the lobes of the ears were three can keys, and the
temples were tattooed with tribal scars.</p>

<p><q>Corporal Inyira!</q> said zu Pfeiffer sharply. The
black body twitched at the voice. <q>You are to leave
to-morrow for Dar-es-salaam and you will take as a
prisoner a white man who has been taking your tribe
as slaves and selling them to the Abyssinians. The
Bwana Mkubwa protects you from these evil white
men and Arabs. You know that?</q> sharply.</p>

<p><q>Bwana!</q></p>

<p><q>Very good. You know what would happen to you
if you were sold as a slave? You have had many
brothers who have been sold to the Abyssinians?</q></p>

<p><q>Bwana! Many, Bwana!</q></p>

<p><q>Very good. Now listen! This white man is very
bad. He leaves with you to-morrow morning for
Dar-es-salaam, but&mdash;he is never to arrive there. I give
him to you. You may do what you like with him, but
never let me see him again. You have my protection.
Understand?</q></p>

<p><q>Bwana!</q></p>

<p>The rubber lips pouted in the emphatic utterance.</p>

<p><q>These are your secret orders. But you are not to
tell them to any man, woman, or child here; you may
tell your men when you are gone. If you disobey I
will cut out your tongue and give you three hundred
lashes. Understand?</q></p>

<p><q>Bwana!</q></p>

<p><q>This man is the enemy of the Bwana Mkubwa.
His enemies are your enemies. His goods are yours.
Begone!</q></p>

<p>The black hand came up jerkily to the black forehead,
shot away out and down; the polished calves moved
<pb n="72"/><anchor id="Pg72"/>
like the eccentrics of an engine, and Corporal Inyira
melted into the shadows.</p>

<p><q>Sergeant Schultz!</q></p>

<p>To smart heel taps on the verandah entered the
sergeant.</p>

<p><q>You will see that Corporal Inyira and the escort
leave before daybreak; moreover, that he talks with
no one before he leaves.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Take a drink, sergeant.</q></p>

<p>With legs as stiff as his sjambok, Sergeant Schultz
obeyed the order; lifted the glass and drank.</p>

<p><q>You may go! Good night, sergeant.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence, good night!</q></p>

<p>As zu Pfeiffer shifted from the chair-arm to the seat
his movements were slightly erratic. He sat forward,
staring at the photograph, as he drank more brandy.
Outside, the p&aelig;an of the frogs pulsed steadily. From
a distance came the throb of a native drum. A cricket
shrilled intermittently.</p>

<p><q>Bwana!</q></p>

<p>The ghostly figure of Bakunjala whispered from the
doorway. Zu Pfeiffer started nervously.</p>

<p><q>Zingala,</q> began Bakunjala timorously.</p>

<p><q>Gott verdamf&mdash;Emshi!</q> snapped zu Pfeiffer, his
ring flashing in an irritable gesture.</p>

<p>Bakunjala melted. Came a mutter of voices and a
subdued giggle.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer sat and drank and stared. Above the
insectile anthem of the night, rose a gurgling voice in a
drinking song.&hellip; Later the crash of a breaking
glass was accompanied by an oath. The glimmer of
three pairs of eyes through the window screen vanished
<pb n="73"/><anchor id="Pg73"/>
and reappeared.&hellip; Once more rose the voice
singing:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 5" type="song">
  <l>&ldquo;Scheiden tut weh,</l>
  <l>Scheiden, ja scheiden, scheiden tut weh!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>Just as the cricket began anew, after having politely
ceased to hear the lieutenant&rsquo;s song, trickled out upon
the clammy air the sound of weeping.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD06" type="chapter">
<pb n="74"/><anchor id="Pg74"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 6</hi>
</head>

<p>In the violet shadow of his square hut inside the
compound, squatted Zalu Zako. The lips and nose
were nearer to the Aryan delicacy than the negroid
bluntness; for the Wongolo, like the Wahima, are a
mixed Bantu-Somali race. In colour his skin had the
red of bronze rather than the blue of the negro, and
the planes of his moulded chest were as light as the
worn ivory bracelets upon his polished limbs. Broad
in the shoulders he had almost the slender hips of a
young girl and his carriage was as balanced as a
dancer&rsquo;s<corr sic=""><anchor id="E9"/><ref
target="e9">.</ref></corr></p>

<p>From a group of small round huts behind his square
hut, where dwelt his two wives, concubines and slaves,
came the clutter of voices. A distant drum throbbed
gently on the hot air. Away in the cool green of the
banana plantation rose the crooning chant of the
unmarried girls and slaves bringing water from the
river.</p>

<p>Apparently Zalu Zako was absorbed in the movements
of a diminutive chicken scratching in the soil.
The omen of the goat was occupying his mind: that
and the death of his grandfather, MFunya MPopo.
There was no sense of grief, for he was not a woman.
Now, at the beginning of his warrior&rsquo;s career, he had
not any desire for divine honours and celibacy. No
man had. Yet Zalu Zako no more dreamed of
questioning the necessity than of spitting in the face of
<pb n="75"/><anchor id="Pg75"/>
an enemy. Always had the first born male of his
family been doomed to the kingly office. There was
never a second born male, for it was not meet that a
god should have paternal brothers. The wives of his
youth and his concubines could have as many children
as they could bear; but according to the law, did he
select the chief wife from whom should spring the one
regal son only when he had become heir apparent; for
then was he not already half divine, being so near the
sacred enclosure up on the hill?</p>

<p>The choice of that chief wife was free as there were
no royal families in the sense of divine descent save the
direct male line of the King-God. But the mind of
Zalu Zako dwelt more upon his personal career. The
life of a warrior was frequently short and that of a god
even briefer. MFunya MPopo had reigned but twenty
moons; MKoffo, so said the elders, had reigned for full
two hundred moons; but then he had been a mighty
magician.</p>

<p>With a harsh squawk a brilliant scarlet and blue bird
with an enormous yellow bill perched on the palisade
of the compound. Immediately the young man
forgot his musing and rose, calling for his spear. A
stocky man, coal black, with a fuzzy tuft of a beard,
came out of the hut. From the slave Zalu Zako took a
broad-bladed spear with a short haft. Watching to
see that the bird was still sitting on the fence as he
passed out of the compound, he set off rapidly through
the village and into the banana plantations in search of a
wart hog which had been rooting up one of his fields of
sweet potatoes. Just as he came within sight of them
a black field rat sprang out of the grass in his path,
glanced round at him, and disappeared. The young
<pb n="76"/><anchor id="Pg76"/>
man&rsquo;s steps slackened, for he knew that the black rat
had spoiled the luck which the banana eater had
portended. Scarcely troubling to glance around the
field, he diverged across at an angle making for a break
in the jungle where he knew was the trail of the boar.
But he grunted contemptuously as he examined the
last spoor, which was at least half a day old. Of
course the hog would not be there.</p>

<p>He bethought himself of another field where sometimes
came buck. But there was no game. The
black rat again! Yet if one waited long enough a
good omen might appear. As he squatted beneath a
banana plant to take snuff came a squawk and the
banana eater&mdash;for it appeared to be the same one&mdash;alighted
on a frond near to him. Zalu Zako waited.
Leisurely and cautiously he arose. The bird peered
at him. Zalu Zako passed and left the banana eater
still sitting there. He felt the weight of his spear
tentatively, for a double omen of luck must mean big
game: possibly an eland or a leopard.</p>

<p>He circled right round the outskirts of the plantation.
But he saw no signs. As he began to make the big
circle again the shadows were lengthening appreciably.
Passing by the ford of the small river, which was swollen
from the rains, he heard a group of young girls chattering
on the river bank as they filled their gourds. He
paused to test which way the wind was blowing in
order to avoid going down wind where the sound of
their voices would scare away any game.</p>

<p>But as he turned to move on he caught a glimpse of a
figure mounting the incline. The motion was as lithe
as a young giraffe; the legs were as straight as spears
and as supple as a kiboko; the moulded hips swayed
<pb n="77"/><anchor id="Pg77"/>
rhythmically like a banana frond in the breeze; the
fluted arch of her back swelled proudly upwards to the
resilient shoulders; and an arm as slender as a lizard&rsquo;s
tail steadied the gourd upon a small black head set
upon a neck like a sapling. The dappled shadows of a
tree played hide and seek upon the tiny hills that were
her firm young breasts, upon the smoothness of her
torso of light bronze. As he gazed her face came into
view in speaking to a comrade just beneath. An
errant shaft of sunlight glinted the pearl of teeth,
glowed the tiny nose and blued the whites of eyes
which were as soft as any antelope.</p>

<p>Zalu Zako clicked the syllable that means astonishment.</p>

<p><q>Wait there, O Bayakala,</q> she called, <q>for I have
to do the making of mighty magic with the spirits of
the wood.</q></p>

<p><q>Eh, eh!</q> responded one of those left by the water
edge, <q>a girl of the hut thatch hath nought to do with
spirits of the wood for their bellies are as big as a
pregnant woman!</q></p>

<p>The young girl laughed and her notes seemed to
Zalu Zako like the dripping of water upon a river
rock.</p>

<p><q>Thou knowest less than the Baroto bird who as
everybody knows is the spirit of one!</q></p>

<p><q>&rsquo;Tis more than thou wilt ever be!</q> retorted the
rival beneath.</p>

<p><q>Ehh! Ehh!</q> exclaimed the girl at the sneer,
<q>thy girdle is rotted long since with juice!</q></p>

<p><q>And thine,</q> shouted the insulted one, who was old
for a spinster, <q>wilt rot with the dryness!</q></p>

<p><q>Tscch! It is dry for the lord whom I will conquer
<pb n="78"/><anchor id="Pg78"/>
with magic such as thou hast never dreamed on, O
Bayakala!</q></p>

<p><q>And who is he for whom thou makest magic, O
daughter of the hut thatch?</q> demanded Zalu Zako,
stepping from the shelter of the tree.</p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> ejaculated Bakuma. <q>I&mdash;we do but tickle
the fronds (jest), O Chief!</q></p>

<p>The only sign of her nervousness was the slight
swaying of the gourd of water upon her head as she
turned up her eyes to the young chief who regarded
her slowly. She edged away. He moved a pace in
front of her. She clutched at the amulet around her
neck as she turned her eyes and said:</p>

<p><q>The cooking fires are low, O Chief, and need be
tended.</q></p>

<p><q>Thy breasts are like unto small anthills,</q> he said,
<q>and thy belly is as smooth as yonder river rock.</q></p>

<p><q>Thy tongue is sweeter than the honey of the
kinglan tree.</q></p>

<p><q>Thy voice is softer than the muted lyre and thy
nose is formed of two petals of an orchid.</q></p>

<p><q>Thy praise is more refreshing than the morning
dew to a thirsty flower.</q></p>

<p><q>And by thy figure am I made more drunken than
by the wine of the Soka palm.</q></p>

<p>For a full minute they stood, a study in light bronze
against the dappled green foliage. The shrill chatter
of the other girls approaching startled Bakuma into
action. She swayed to one side.</p>

<p><q>The spirits of the cooking pot cry aloud for me, O
Chief.</q></p>

<p><q>Who is thy father, little one?</q> he demanded.</p>

<p><q>I am Bakuma, the daughter of Bakala, O Chief.</q></p>
<pb n="79"/><anchor id="Pg79"/>

<p><q>There has been a veil before my eyes that I have
not seen thee before.</q></p>

<p><q>The mountains see not the tiny brooks amid the
mighty forests,</q> murmured Bakuma and sped up the
path.</p>

<p>Zalu Zako stood motionless watching her form melt
into the green, and as he turned towards the river he
met Bayakala and the other women who shrank aside
from the path to allow the Son of the Snake to pass in
silence. Yet at the ford he paused. He had forgotten
the omen of the banana eater and the purpose for
which he had come.</p>

<p>As Bakuma sped along in a gliding lope the amulet
swayed rhythmically to the whispered praises of the
power of Marufa, mixed with ardent prayers to the
spirits to provide the fat goat with which to propitiate
the spirit of the woods; for had not the love charm
already manifested its wondrous power? As she
hastened through the banana plantation she could not
resist diverging a little in the direction of the magician&rsquo;s
hut. As she passed, she saw him seated on the threshold
of the compound gathering inspiration from his
favourite wall. But Marufa observed her demeanour,
and being something of a student of men, he deducted
that the charm had already begun to work.</p>

<p>Marufa, as all successful men, had a strain of luck.
Before the shadows had crept a hand&rsquo;s breadth came
MYalu, indignant and exasperated. The three tusks
had been paid and the footprint obtained; but he had
discovered that it was no easy matter to procure the
other ingredients which he suspected the wizard had
known well and intended as a means to extract more
ivory. After the ceremonious greetings he protested
<pb n="80"/><anchor id="Pg80"/>
that the task given was almost impossible to execute.
Marufa remained imperturbably interested in his wall.</p>

<p><q>But as thou knowest,</q> insisted MYalu, <q>the hair
and the toe-nail and the spittle of the Son of the Snake
are more than difficult to obtain. Does a man so
carelessly render himself unto his enemies, and he the
Son of the Snake? None save one of his household
could purloin a single hair. Even this morning was
his hair shaved and the remnants, as thou knowest well,
deposited in the temple with him who was his father.</q></p>

<p><q>The hair, the toe-nail, and the spittle,</q> mumbled
the old man, <q>must I have for such mighty magic.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> snorted MYalu, <q>with a man of the clay,
but with one who is half divine, the Son of the Snake!
Ehh!</q></p>

<p><q>The bow is useless without the arrows,</q> mumbled
the old man.</p>

<p><q>Tsch. &rsquo;Tis a mighty hunter that hath not the
arrows for his bow,</q> sneered MYalu.</p>

<p><q>Verily,</q> retorted Marufa disinterestedly, <q>and
still more a mighty man who cannot do his own
hunting!</q></p>

<p><q>No warrior hath been purified more frequently
than I,</q> boasted MYalu, referring to the ceremony
incumbent upon those who have taken life to appease
the ghosts of the slain.</p>

<p><q>The spirits obey not the crowing of a cockerel,</q>
reminded Marufa.</p>

<p><q>Tsch!</q> For a while both sat silent, MYalu
gloomily watching a hen.</p>

<p><q>Aie! Aie!</q> he lamented at last, <q>what is there
that I may do, for indeed she hath caught my soul in a
trap. Aie! Aie!</q></p>
<pb n="81"/><anchor id="Pg81"/>

<p><q>If the hunter cannot make arrows, he may buy
them,</q> remarked Marufa, who had been patiently
waiting for this state of mind.</p>

<p><q>Eh! The bowstring hath been costly but the
arrows! Aie! Aie! What would&rsquo;st thou?</q></p>

<p><q>The rich man payeth in his kind. Four tusks of
fine grain.</q></p>

<p><q>Eh! Eh!</q></p>

<p><q>Maybe there are others whose hands are not
withered.</q></p>

<p><q>Others than the Son of the Snake?</q> demanded
MYalu quickly.</p>

<p><q>Who knows? There are more fools than
chickens,</q> muttered the old man.</p>

<p>MYalu stared disconsolately at the distant bananas.
Perhaps, he reflected, it would be cheaper to pay
the price the girl&rsquo;s uncle demanded, yet&qdash; MYalu
had bought other wives whose unimpassioned charms
had quickly staled. His soul, as he put it, had indeed
been tempted into a trap by Bakuma; for he wished
only that she should desire him as he desired her. Yet
was he angry. Love seemed to be a costly business.
Marufa tapped out snuff and sniffed delicately with the
air of a connoisseur devoting himself to the pleasure of
the moment. Replacing the cork of twisted leaves he
stirred as if to rise.</p>

<p><q>Canst thou procure then the nail and the hairs
that are asked by the spirits?</q> inquired MYalu
sulkily.</p>

<p><q>All things are possible to the son of MTungo,</q>
asserted Marufa. <q>Four tusks, and these things are
found; but of fine grain, for the others were old and
coarse.</q></p>
<pb n="82"/><anchor id="Pg82"/>

<p><q>Ehh! How wilt thou procure these things?</q>
demanded MYalu sceptically.</p>

<p><q>The ways of the wise are not the ways of fools.</q></p>

<p><q>The tusks are thine,</q> said MYalu reluctantly, <q>if
thou wilt tell me how thou wilt procure them.</q></p>

<p><q>Thy words are like unto the vomit of a dog,</q>
muttered the old man.</p>

<p><q>But how? My heart is not bound in clay.</q></p>

<p><q>Tch!</q> clicked Marufa contemptuously. <q>Every
fool must needs see the spoor of the god which he
cannot read. I have spoken.</q> MYalu regarded the
old wizard incredulously. <q>Tch! Send the four
tusks as we have agreed and so shall it be. Begone!</q></p>

<p>Slowly MYalu rose, made his greeting, and departed
more impressed than ever that the old man was a
mighty magician.</p>

<p>During the hour when the soul is small and dwells
timidly around the feet Marufa dozed in the cool
of his hut; but later when it spread boldly out was
he squatted once more in his favourite seat at the
entrance to the compound, taking snuff and contemplating.
The shadows grew from violet to blue;
the small hens pecked for worms with avidity and the
goats scratched with vigour in the cool. Patiently
Marufa sat. At length that for which he had waited
with a sound though primitive knowledge of psychology,
came to pass. Bakuma appeared, apprehensive,
but with yet an abandon which sang her happiness.
Beside Marufa she sat so as to avoid the shadow of
one foot protruding beyond that of the fence.</p>

<p><q>O great and mighty magician,</q> she began eagerly,
after the formal greetings. <q>Indeed all that thou hast
said hath come to pass. Thy charm is infallible.</q></p>
<pb n="83"/><anchor id="Pg83"/>

<p><q>Ugh!</q> grunted Marufa unconcernedly.</p>

<p><q>All that my heart desireth hath already begun to
be. I thank thee.</q></p>

<p><q>Ugh!</q></p>

<p><q>O mighty son of MTungo, what must I now do?</q></p>

<p><q>Thou knowest,</q> mumbled Marufa, fumbling for
the snuff case.</p>

<p><q>Aie! Aie! but I have no fat goat!</q> cried
Bakuma, who had hoped fatuously that the wizard
would have forgotten. <q>I, a girl of the hut thatch,
how should I have a goat?</q> Marufa tapped snuff as
if no romance were in the making. Bakuma&rsquo;s bright
eyes, sharpened by the proximity of the promise of her
love, watched the old man keenly. <q>Listen, O great
and mighty son of MTungo, to whom all things are
known, who canst accomplish all that thou desireth,
Bayakala, my cousin, hath a goat, but it is old and
skinny. Perhaps&qdash;</q></p>

<p><q>In the nostrils of the spirits,</q> asserted Marufa
instantly, <q>all odours are the same except that of the
fat goat whom they love.</q></p>

<p><q>Aie! then am I undone, for no fat goat have
I!</q> wailed Bakuma. <q>Know I not one who hath
a goat who would smile on me, a girl of the hut
thatch.</q></p>

<p><q>Ugh!</q></p>

<p>Bakuma regarded him imploringly, but Marufa&rsquo;s
gaze was fixed upon the wall as if his mind were turned
to matters of more importance.<corr sic="&rdquo;"><anchor
id="E10"/><ref target="e10">&nbsp;</ref></corr></p>

<p><q>O mighty wizard, what must I do?</q> implored
Bakuma desperately.</p>

<p><q>Ugh!</q></p>

<p>After a prolonged contemplation, said Marufa:
<pb n="84"/><anchor id="Pg84"/>
<q>If thou canst get no goat, then is there another path
by which thou mayest accomplish thy end.</q></p>

<p><q>Eh!</q></p>

<p><q>But it is very difficult.</q></p>

<p><q>By my cord, will I do all that thou canst bid me to
do!</q> swore Bakuma in anxious haste.</p>

<p><q>Ugh! This path is more certain of success for
the will of the spirits are oftentimes chary of their
favours.</q></p>

<p><q>O mighty one!</q> breathed Bakuma, as he paused
tantalisingly.</p>

<p><q>But the matter is exceedingly difficult&mdash;and
dangerous.</q></p>

<p><q>If the flower hath no sun hath it ever lived?</q></p>

<p><q>As even thou shouldst know,</q> mumbled Marufa,
more casually than ever, <q>he who possesses a part of
the soul may do magic thereon.</q></p>

<p><q>Aye! Aye!</q></p>

<p><q>Bring me then of the nail parings one, of his hairs
one, and of his spittle. Then may I do magic thereon
which he cannot resist.</q></p>

<p><q>O mighty magician!</q> gasped Bakuma, appalled at
the difficulty and the danger of the task.</p>

<p><q>That path is sure. There is no other.</q></p>

<p><q>Eh! &hellip; But if they of thy craft should know
then am I doomed!</q></p>

<p><q>There is no other.</q></p>

<p>Torn between her love and the dread of the penalty
incurred by the sacrilege of the theft of the parts of
one who might any day be King-God, Bakuma stared
distraught.</p>

<p><q>Were not my words white? Hath not the love
charm thou hast already had done even as I did say?</q></p>
<pb n="85"/><anchor id="Pg85"/>

<p><q>O mighty one!</q></p>

<p><q>But that is only as the goat to the leopard. The
trap must be dug&mdash;or the scent of the bait will be
blown.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> gasped Bakuma, in desperation, <q>by my
twin soul which dwells beneath the banana plant, will
I do it!</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD07" type="chapter">
<pb n="86"/><anchor id="Pg86"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 7</hi>
</head>

<p>Gerald Birnier had flattered himself that he
was a philosopher with a sense of humour, fairly
well developed by ten years&rsquo; wandering about Central
Africa, but deep emotions submerge such cherished
qualities.</p>

<p>The presence of the photograph was explicable by
several surmises: zu Pfeiffer might have met Lucille
at Washington, Paris, or Berlin: she might have given
him the photograph or he might have bought it, or
even stolen it. But&mdash;the signature <q>&agrave; toi, Lucille</q>!
There lay the sting which maddened Birnier and
strangled reason, the fact at which his mind yawed
futilely.</p>

<p>So great had been the shock that the arrest had
seemed but a secondary matter in accord with the
insanity of zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s statement that he was engaged
to Lucille. The affair had been so sudden that for
some time he could progress no farther in an attempt
to think than a gasp, pawing mentally at an intangible
substance which eluded him like a child&rsquo;s small hand
trying to grasp a toy balloon. Sense of reality appeared
to have been dissolved. He had followed the sergeant
across the square meekly without realising what was
happening, and when he had been placed in a whitewashed
room at the back of the native guard house
which served as a jail, he sat down upon a chair, too
bewildered to comprehend where he was. That <q>&agrave;
<pb n="87"/><anchor id="Pg87"/>
toi, Lucille</q> rang like the clanging in a belfry, drowning
the sound of other thoughts.</p>

<p>By the light of a hurricane lamp he regarded the
soldiers bringing in an old camp bed with indifference.
When they had gone he began to pace up and down
the small room frantically trying to gain control. To
the first prompting of a logical reason for the whole
affair he did not dare to listen. The disrupting cause
was the complete inability to explain the familiar
signature. To his Anglo-Saxonised mind, bred in the
strict code of the south, tutoyer was only permissible
to dogs, inferiors, most intimate relations and lovers.
He was far too unbalanced to see the humour as he
solemnly announced that certainly zu Pfeiffer was not
a dog, nor in the social code an inferior; he was not
a relation; therefore.&hellip; His mind baulked and
raced into incoherence.</p>

<p>A point of view which added false premises, as well
as his attitude to those two little words, was the
consciousness that many would consider that he had
not treated his wife as a husband should do. This
possibility had never occurred to him before, so that it
came with disproportionate emphasis.</p>

<p>As a young man he had been too absorbed in his
profession to be a lady&rsquo;s man; and of love he had
reckoned little until he had met the Lucille Charltrain
with whom half the world was in love. And she
doubtless, like many a spoiled beauty, was a little
piqued that the professor did not join the throng of
her courtiers. In Birnier&rsquo;s mind there had ever been
associated with love the fear that the woman would
demand too much, that no woman could understand
that a man&rsquo;s profession must of necessity come before
<pb n="88"/><anchor id="Pg88"/>
all things. Lucille was the first woman whom he had
met who really seemed to understand this point of
view, as she, too, was devoted to her art. This had
grown to be the biggest bond and attraction between
them. Most men wished to make of love a nuisance,
as Lucille once put it. So the good-looking professor
had won the beauty. They were married on the
mutual understanding that each should pursue their
respective professions. Shortly afterwards Birnier
was offered a special mission to go to Africa for the
purpose of studying the customs and superstitions
of the natives. Lucille had consented, forbidden,
relented, and laughed.</p>

<p>So Lucille sang from musical height to height and
her husband sped from depth to depth in the seas of
human fatuity. Whenever he took a furlough he went,
of course, straight to her, wheresoever she was, in
Berlin, New York, or Paris. To Birnier the situation
was ideal. He had never dreamed of any other woman.
Indeed the tracts of his mind were so filled with
statistics of anthropology and Lucille that there was
little or no room for any one else. The delight and
satisfaction in Birnier&rsquo;s mind were so sincere that he
never had dreamed of questioning whether Lucille&rsquo;s
point of view had remained the same. But
now?</p>

<p>That <q>&agrave; toi</q> stung and baited him into the unprecedented
realisation that after all women had been
known to change their opinions. Perhaps pride had
prevented her from ever openly demanding other ways.
Lucille was young and beautiful, courted and flattered
on every hand. Perhaps he had been wrong to leave
her for years at a stretch. Of her loyalty he had had
<pb n="89"/><anchor id="Pg89"/>
no doubt, but for the first time in his marital life the
professor&rsquo;s profound knowledge of human nature was
shot like a spot-light on to his own affairs. Yet his
erudition did not in the least relieve him from the laws
of emotional reaction.</p>

<p>Perhaps in an emotional moment.&hellip; That
knowledge of the frailties of genus homo was too deep
for comfort in such actuation.</p>

<p><q>&Agrave; toi, Lucille! &Agrave; toi, Lucille!</q> rang and echoed
as he paced that room, striving for control.&hellip; And&mdash;and&mdash;why
else should zu Pfeiffer have gone crazy?&mdash;why
had he exclaimed: <q>Das ist der Schweinh&uuml;nd</q>?
The husband, of course, whom he wanted
out of the way, and he had immediately seized the
opportunity to secure that end, seemingly indifferent
to consequences&mdash;symptomatic of the state of <q>being
in love.</q></p>

<p>Around and about, about and around a field of weeds
which had sprung from that seed <q>&agrave; toi,</q> had paced
the professor all night. When the green was creeping
through the high barred window, Sergeant Schneider
had brought to him some coffee and biscuits. Birnier
had drunk the coffee thirstily, and as the sergeant had
no English nor French, had tried in broken German to
extract some information. But the sergeant had merely
grunted and retired. At seven he had returned again
and escorted Birnier to the Court House. He returned
from the mock trial a little more in touch with reality,
and more impressed with the malignity of zu Pfeiffer.
Yet the gratuitous insults, the laboured farce of the
registering of an alleged Swiss trader, Birnier saw
through, and was relieved, for it argued that zu
Pfeiffer&rsquo;s intention was to make Lucille a widow. No
<pb n="90"/><anchor id="Pg90"/>
other reason could account for the homicidal intentions
displayed.</p>

<p>At the glow of dawn next day he was aroused by the
big corporal who ordered him out. The tone of the
man&rsquo;s voice naturally stimulated a violent reaction.
But Birnier realised that his sole chance lay in controlling
himself to accept stoically whatever treatment
was offered; for he saw instantly that any protest or
indignation would be interpreted as insubordination
and possibly be made an excuse to shoot him down.</p>

<p>Outside in the grey light he saw under the guard of
six native soldiers, the five others of his party. Mungongo,
his personal <q>boy,</q> cried out at the sight of
him, asking what was the meaning of these strange
happenings. Before Birnier could reply, the big
corporal struck the man savagely with a kiboko, bidding
him to be silent. In spite of his resolution, the reaction
made Birnier turn angrily upon the soldier, who
deliberately repeated the order, and struck the white
man across the face. As Birnier raised his fist the
man lowered his bayonet and grinned, adding, apparently
for the benefit of his men, that now the white
would learn what it was to be a slave.</p>

<p>Furiously Birnier looked around for Sergeant
Schneider: but no white man was in sight.&hellip;
He turned to Mungongo and said quickly: <q>Take no
heed. Do as they bid thee for the moment.</q></p>

<p><q>Be silent!</q> shouted the corporal, but as he raised
his kiboko, Birnier looked him quietly straight in the
eyes. The black hand was lowered; the man turned
away, ordering the party in general to march.</p>

<p>Dishevelled and without any camp equipment,
Birnier began to march as the blood of the sky paled
<pb n="91"/><anchor id="Pg91"/>
to orange. At the bottom of the great parade ground
he turned in time to see the relieving guard falling in
behind the Court House. For one moment he
hesitated whether to put all to the test by refusing to
go; but a significant gesture with the ever ready
rifle of the corporal signified that he would not be
given a chance. Humiliated, he obeyed. But just
beyond the last hut, waiting by the path, was a group
of women loaded with the soldiers&rsquo; gear; and beside
them were some carriers bearing his green tent and
apparently all his equipment. The sight cheered him
a little. He attempted to find immediate consolation
in the idea that the savagery of the corporal might
possibly abate when they were away from the neighbourhood
of the inciting agent, whom he was sure was
zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p>Leading the caravan was a soldier; next to him came
Birnier and behind him was another soldier, after whom
walked Mungongo and the four other prisoners, with
a soldier between each; and then the corporal, strutting
portentously important within easy shooting
distance of the white man. The carriers and women
brought up the rear.</p>

<p>The path led for some miles through the dreary
swamp following the course of the small bayou,
crossing and recrossing small streams swollen with the
rains, through which the white man was forced to
wade to his hips. For the first mile Birnier was so
angry and humiliated that he dared not catch the
troubled eyes of Mungongo. But by force of will he
attained a reasonable plane of philosophic resignation,
temporary at least, and smiled at the boy, who grinned
back like a tickled child. At any rate, soliloquised
<pb n="92"/><anchor id="Pg92"/>
Birnier, he had at least one man upon whom he
could rely.</p>

<p>At the head of the bayou they reached higher ground
and the path zigzagged through dense jungle thick with
fan palms. The longer Birnier pondered upon the
situation the nearer he came towards the conclusion
that he had better make his escape as soon as possible,
or he would never have the chance. Rather by the
uneasy glances of Mungongo, who dared not speak,
did he guess that they had left the regular trail to the
coast. What their destination was he could not
imagine. Probably, he thought grimly, to make an
end of the whole party and return to the camp. Yet
why trouble to travel so far? And another good reason
to hasten an escape was that, although for the moment
he was in good health, a few days of exposure would
subject him to fever and consequent weakness.</p>

<p>Now and again the theme <q>&agrave; toi</q> would return like
the refrain of a song to which he found himself keeping
step; but the words sometimes became meaningless;
for in the merciful way that nature has, the impulse
of self-preservation so occupied his mind that he had
scarcely leisure to worry over marital troubles.</p>

<p>At the end of about two hours, when the heat of the
sun was beginning to be felt severely, the corporal
called a halt in the shade of a great baobab. Birnier
sat down with his back against the bole. Alongside
him squatted the corporal deliberately and called to
the women for a gourd of juwala. There is a certain
acid odour which native beer has that is particularly
irritating to a dry palate. The corporal drank deep,
sighed with satisfaction and set the gourd beside him
almost touching the feet of the white. Involuntarily
<pb n="93"/><anchor id="Pg93"/>
Birnier swallowed. The corporal saw and grinned.
Birnier understood and turned his back to the man.
Immediately the corporal arose and lowering his
bayonet until it pricked the sleeve of Birnier&rsquo;s coat,
ordered him to get up. In the knowledge that he
would be instantly shot by the others if he attempted
to resist, he had perforce to obey.</p>

<p>Outside the shade of the great tree, in the full glare
of the sun, was the white man compelled to sit while
the black corporal, with the rifle ready across his knee,
drank deep and handed the gourd to his fellows.
Again Birnier turned his back to him. But he began
to realise faintly what treatment he would receive
before the end came and an intimate knowledge of
native ingenuity made him feel physically sick.</p>

<p>Half an hour later they were on the march again.
The path became rugged and difficult, passing through
thorny ground, following burbling watercourses of
rough stones. To make the going more trying Birnier
wore light moccasins intended for camp use instead
of his high field boots. Once when a long
thorn penetrated the flank of his shoe he stopped to
extract it. The corporal shouted at him; the soldier
behind called him unmentionable names in the dialect
and pushed him with his foot. The insult and the
heat of the sun maddened him. He leaped to his
feet. The corporal raised his gun promptly and jeered.
For a moment Birnier stood trembling with passion;
then he closed his eyes as if to shut out sight and
sound and limped forward, fighting with himself.</p>

<p>With natives had Birnier always been able to
negotiate, to live, and to quarrel when necessary, on
terms of amity; but this black <q>swine,</q> as he termed
<pb n="94"/><anchor id="Pg94"/>
him in his wrath, prinked out in a masquerade of a
white man&rsquo;s clothes.&hellip; He jammed his heel down
savagely upon the thorn to divert the southern passion.
After all it was not the man&rsquo;s fault but zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s.
Put a white man in a uniform and he becomes a beast;
put a nigger in a uniform and he becomes a devil,
Birnier forced himself to reflect.</p>

<p>The sun grew incandescent. The heat and the
flies quickened his thirst. He plodded on, stumbling
over the stones, sagging heavily in sandy patches. They
had left the comparative shelter of the jungle and were
crossing a flat plain approaching, he judged, to a river
bed. The carriers, he noted, had lagged behind.
Soon they must halt. Even the fiend of a corporal
would not fatigue himself too much for the sake of
tormenting a white man.</p>

<p>Then a new idea was added to the plagues. He had
tasted nothing save the coffee, canned beef, and native
bread which had been given him for dinner on the
previous evening. The corporal had manifested his
conception of humour by refusing him beer and water
on the march; was he going to torment him by
starvation as well as by thirst? And if torture were
reserved for him by that grinning black brute, then
he knew what would be the end that awaited him.</p>

<p>Within an hour they came to a river about forty
yards broad, a swollen rushing torrent. There was
no village as he had expected. The corporal halted.
Birnier slid down the bank and thrust his muzzle into
the flood. There was torture in the restraint not to
drink too much. He clambered up the slope to find
the corporal grinning at him. He turned his back
and lay down. There was no shade; only short
<pb n="95"/><anchor id="Pg95"/>
scrub and grass. Small sand flies buzzed and stung.
He heard the gurgle of the corporal&rsquo;s military water-bottle.
But this time the sting was extracted; his
belly was moist.</p>

<p>Birnier stretched out, shielding from the glare the
little that he could with his hands. Faint echoes of
<q>&agrave; toi</q> strolled across his field of consciousness.
He observed the apparently stoical indifference of
Mungongo squatted a few feet from him, a soldier
sprawling between them; but he cursed because
investigations had taught him that that <q>stoical</q>
should usually be read as <q>bovinity,</q> as he had termed
it; and he smiled dismally at the ancient story that
so well illustrated the point, of the peasant who expressed
his occupation through the long winter hours
as <q>sometimes we sits and thinks but mostly we just
sits.</q></p>

<p>Mungongo <q>just sits,</q> he repeated, and envied him.
Yet in that heat and hunger, waiting for his savage
captor to wreak some new fancy upon him, so saturated
with philosophic interest in life was Birnier, that he
wandered off into a meditation upon the mechanical
fatuity of human conduct; illustrating his reflections
by his own actions when stirred by emotion. <q>The
loaded gun may be as wise as Solomon was reputed
to be,</q> he remarked beneath his hands, <q>but all the
same when some one pulls the trigger the damn thing
goes off,</q> and sat up to confront the muzzle of the
corporal&rsquo;s rifle, who was ordering him to get up.
Birnier rose. But to the savage&rsquo;s amazement, he
smiled.</p>

<p>The corporal backed away.</p>

<p><q>Ah, my friend,</q> remarked Birnier blandly in
<pb n="96"/><anchor id="Pg96"/>
English. <q>You&rsquo;ve lost, for I have found that which
was lost!</q></p>

<p>The corporal scowled and bade him to follow.
Birnier obeyed but he felt that he was obliging the
man. The carriers had arrived and the green tent
was pitched, invitingly cool against the grey flood of
the river. He followed the corporal gladly, but at
ten feet from his tent, beside a thorn bush four feet
tall which spread in a fan shape, he was bidden to sit.
For the moment, newly arrived from his philosophic
dreams, he did not comprehend.</p>

<p><q>But that is my tent!</q> he said in Kiswahili.</p>

<p><q>Sit down!</q> commanded the corporal, grinning.
<q>The white seller of slaves sits in the place of the
slave, but his owner dwells in the place of the blessed.</q></p>

<p><q>O God!</q> remarked Birnier as he bumped his head
against black reality.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD08" type="chapter">
<pb n="97"/><anchor id="Pg97"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 8</hi>
</head>

<p>Bakuma sat in the shade of the reed fence
preparing the evening meal of boiled bananas.
From her slender neck swung the precious amulet
at which, as if to reassure herself of its safety, she
clutched occasionally. Her half-sister, who had not
yet passed through the initiation at maturity, sprawled
upon her belly in the dwindling rays of the sun, scratching
her woolly head. Beyond her were two slaves
tending a fire beneath two large calabashes, preparatory
to the brewing of banana beer, which had of course
to be done by the chief widow, Bakuma&rsquo;s half-sister&rsquo;s
mother.</p>

<p>The mind of Bakuma was occupied by percepts of
the charms of Zalu Zako; particularly as memorised
on that afternoon by the river when the effect of the
love charm had begun to work. These memories, as
sweet as they would have been to any maid, were shot
with gay colours by the words of the wizard; for he
had assured her that with the toe-nail and hair to work
magic upon, Zalu Zako would be bewitched by her
charms for all time. And she had obtained them!
She could have gotten the goat, not a skinny goat as
described under the inhibiting influence of a wild
hope that the wizard would relent. Her cousin,
smarting under the reproaches of her husband, had
such a goat, fat as goats in Wongolo go, and she was
eager to exchange it or anything for an infallible
<pb n="98"/><anchor id="Pg98"/>
charm against sterility. Bakuma feared to part with
the charm, yet the matter was pressing; immediately
she was the wife of Zalu Zako she would be in a
position to purchase all the charms in the village.</p>

<p>But difficult to obtain as they were, for as everybody
knows no man leaves portions of himself around
that may fall into the hands of an enemy to work magic
upon, least of all a rich man, <q>half divine,</q> she had
obtained some nail parings and one hair. With that
charm against sterility, the only thing of value Bakuma
possessed, had she bribed a concubine of Zalu Zako&rsquo;s
household to steal the ingredients required from the
hut thatch where they had been hidden after the
official shaving and paring following the ceremony of
his father, pending their removal to the sacred precincts
of the temple.</p>

<p>Above her passion for Zalu Zako was her natural
feminine appreciation of a good match. The Son of
the Snake was far better from a woman&rsquo;s point of view
than union with a successful wizard. In the event
of the death of the King-God, Kawa Kendi, the
wives of his son and successor, although denied to him,
were accorded special privileges; and upon his demise
these royal wives retained their home upon the hill
which had become his tomb. Moreover, as Bakuma
knew well, now that Zalu Zako was heir-apparent, he
must choose the principal wife who would for her life
remain paramount in the household, avoiding the dread
of every ageing woman that her husband would take
unto him another wife younger and more supple.</p>

<p>The one mosquito in paradise was the fear that as
soon as her uncle, her father&rsquo;s brother to whom she
belonged by inheritance, learned the august personage
<pb n="99"/><anchor id="Pg99"/>
who desired her, he would raise the price to a prohibitive
figure; for he was mean as well as stupid and
lazy, wherefore he had few goods, and although Zalu
Zako was a rich man she knew that any man save a
fool loves to drive a good bargain if only to prove his
astuteness. Therefore was another imperative necessity
to procure every means of magic and charm to
fan the flame of her lover&rsquo;s desires.</p>

<p>Yet always flashed a bright-hued lizard in the sun
of her joy when she imagined herself installed as the
chief wife in the household of Zalu Zako, an unassailable
position as long as she had one male child; the practical
mistress of his first two wives as well as the retinue of
slaves.</p>

<p>Bazila, the younger wife, Bakuma knew well;
the favourite and haughty, covered with the most
expensive amulets against every ill and black magic,
she was overfond of sneering at young girls of the
hut thatch whose charms had not yet netted a victim.</p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> gasped Bakuma and flashed her teeth as
she rolled the warm leaves around the sticky mess,
<q>then will the scent of my body be more bitter than
the flower of the fish-faced cactus!</q></p>

<p>And so through the night did Bakuma nibble at
anticipatory joys as she lay upon her reed mat on the
slightly raised dais of the floor which was her bed,
watching the smoke of the fire in the middle of the
hut lose itself in the shadows of the roof, and listening
in the hope of hearing some voice of the spirits whom
Marufa was to invoke on her behalf. Save for the
occasional bleating of a goat and once the harsh
scream of the Baroto bird, which made her heart
contract, for it is a bad omen, the night was still.
<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>
However, at the hour of the monkey Bakuma arose
to replenish the fire. As the western star was melting
in the warm green she left the compound. On the
outskirts of the village the tall figure of MYalu
appeared from the shadows of the plantation.</p>

<p><q>Greeting, daughter of Bakala,</q> said he, his eyes
greedily devouring her.</p>

<p><q>Greeting, O Chief!</q> returned Bakuma, as she
politely stepped to one side to avoid standing on the
vague shadow of the chief.</p>

<p><q>The fawn seeks the pastures early,</q> remarked
MYalu.</p>

<p><q>Before the breath of the sun the grass is sweeter,</q>
retorted Bakuma, edging away.</p>

<p><q>Aye,</q> remarked MYalu, with a hungry glint in
his eyes, <q>thou art eager to slake thy thirst? But
in the valley will no buck walk this day!</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> gasped Bakuma, recollecting instantly
the omen of the Baroto bird heard that night. <q>What
meanest thou?</q></p>

<p><q>Maybe the soul of him hath wandered and been
caught in a trap or maybe&qdash;</q> He paused to watch
her closely&mdash;<q>maybe an enemy hath made magic
upon the parts of him.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> Bakuma started nervously.</p>

<p>MYalu smiled and touched her upon the shoulder.</p>

<p><q>Thy flesh is cooler than the dew.</q></p>

<p><q>Nay, nay, O Chief, thou hast not tied my girdle,</q>
she protested, as she backed away from him, her eyes
wide like a terrified deer&rsquo;s.</p>

<p><q>Nay, but will I untie it soon,</q> he retorted.</p>

<p>But as he stepped towards her she turned and fled.
As MYalu watched her running as swiftly as a pookoo
<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>
into the plantation he grinned and called out: <q>Even
now is the cooling draught steaming in the breath of
the Unmentionable One! But the goblet shall hold
a sweeter draught for me!</q></p>

<p><q>Aie! Aie-e!</q> wailed Bakuma, her heart beating
furiously, <q>what devil hath bewitched me! O, that
father of many goats hath betrayed me! Aie!
Aie-e! O, the cry of the Baroto bird! Aie! Aie-e!</q></p>

<p>And when Bakuma, distraught with terror by the
menace that she had only procured the nail paring
and hair to give her lover into the hands of the false
magician who, of course, had been bought by MYalu,
arrived at the <q>pastures</q> by the river, as MYalu had
foretold, no buck walked there.</p>

<p>The sun spilled blue shadows on the village from the
sacred hill where another scene was being enacted,
and it was not as imagined by the amorous MYalu.</p>

<p>In the council house, which was within the outer
fence and before the sacred enclosure, was in progress
a meeting of the doctors. In the door of the enclosure
squatted Kawa Kendi, with Kingata Mata in attendance
tending the royal fires. Before him, in front
of their fellows, were seated Bakahenzie and Marufa
in full dress of green feathers and the scarlet plume.
The left side of the idol, which was so set that the
shadow never fell upon the entrance to the compound,
was gilded by the sun; the mouth grinned in one
corner, one eye was closed in shadow, seemingly like
a prodigious wink.</p>

<p>To the thrumming of the sacred band Bakahenzie
was rocking himself to and fro mumbling incantations.
Kawa Kendi squatted immobile, but the others swayed
and grunted softly in rhythm. Then on a sudden did
<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>
Bakahenzie lift up his head and cry in a great voice.
The drums ceased and the body of witch-doctors
remained motionless, expectant. Bakahenzie dropped
his head and began to chant:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Behold! I have heard the voice of the trees</l>
  <l>Crying softly by night!</l>
  <l>Lo! the soul of the plant is in labour!</l>
  <l>As a woman with child!</l>
  <l>Behold! is she not to break forth?</l>
  <l>For she crieth for aid.</l>
  <l>Unless she be heard the infant will slip!</l>
  <l>The fruit will not be!</l>
  <l>The plants will not break!</l>
  <l>The milk will be sour!</l>
  <l>The beer will be green!</l>
  <l>Women will not bear!</l>
  <l>Our spears will be blunt!</l>
  <l>Our magic will wane!</l>
  <l>And He will be wroth!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p><q>Eh! Ah! &hellip; Eh! Ah! &hellip; Eh! Ah! &hellip;
Eh! Ah! &hellip; Eh! Ah! &hellip;</q>
<lb/>grunted the chorus of the doctors. Then chanted Marufa:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Lo! I have slept and been that which I must!</l>
  <l>Preying swiftly by night!</l>
  <l>Behold! I have bloodied my fangs in the throat</l>
  <l>Of a mighty bull eland!</l>
  <l>Blood succoured the earth and upsprang a plant!</l>
  <l>Which panted for blood!</l>
  <l>The sap of the plant is the soul of the tree!</l>
  <pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>
  <l>Take heed to the thirst</l>
  <l>Of Him who first was!</l>
  <l>Who lusts for a maid!</l>
  <l>Full breasted, soft thighed!</l>
  <l>Supple, bow arched!</l>
  <l>Clean blooded and strong!</l>
  <l>Whose name is forbid!</l>
  <l>Whose name is a sin!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p><q>Who hath stolen the name?</q> screamed Bakahenzie,
leaping to his feet. <q>Who is she that hath
stolen the name?</q></p>

<p><q>Eh! Ahh! &hellip; Eh! Ahh! &hellip; Eh! Ahh! &hellip; Eh!
Ahh! &hellip; Eh! Ahh! &hellip;</q></p>

<p>As the drums throbbed swifter Bakahenzie began to
shuffle in a stooping posture as if he were snuffing a
trail. To the continuous grunting he continued this
dance for fully a quarter of an hour. Then stopping
abruptly in front of the king he screamed:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Let her be bidden</l>
  <l>To come to the feast!</l>
  <l>Let her be oiled!</l>
  <l>Let her be shaved!</l>
  <l>Let her come dancing!</l>
  <l>Let her be joyful!</l>
  <l>Let her be decked!</l>
  <l>Let her be glad!</l>
  <l>Lips of the groom</l>
  <l>Thirst for her mouth!</l>
  <l>Let her be drunken</l>
  <l>To bear his sweet weight!</l>
  <pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>
  <l>That the crops will be full!</l>
  <l>That the cattle grow fat</l>
  <l>Wives will throw men!</l>
  <l>Spears will slice foes!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>He sank suddenly upon his haunches. The drums
ceased. A slave appeared bearing a pure white kid.
Kingata Mata took the animal and held it before
Kawa Kendi, who muttered a long incantation over
it and cut the throat with a spear head. Then to
Marufa was the bleeding carcass carried and while
still alive he slit open the belly, smeared the liquid
over his chest and right arm, and tore out the guts.
The corpse was removed. Marufa, working only
with the enchanted arm, turned the entrails over and
about, peering closely.</p>

<p>There was silence. The shadows grew in depth.
From the village came an occasional bleat and the
voice of a distant girl chanting.</p>

<p>After a prolonged and studious search, Marufa
caught up and wrapt round his neck an intestine. As
he rose, the group of witch-doctors broke out into a
mighty groaning. Marufa speeded across the small
clearing and kneeled before Kawa Kendi. Through
the bloody necklet he whispered two syllables: <q>kuma.</q></p>

<p>The groaning ceased as suddenly as it had commenced.
Kawa Kendi cried out in a loud voice:</p>

<p><q>The bride is found!</q></p>

<p>Instantly the drums began a furious beat. A mighty
shout rose from all assembled and they fell to the chest
and belly grunting: <q>Eh! Ahh! &hellip; Eh! Ahh! &hellip;</q> as
Bakahenzie and Marufa began to dance the
dance of thanksgiving.</p>
<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>

<p>Ba<hi rend="font-style: italic">kuma</hi> had been doomed to be the
victim for the Feast of the Harvest Festival, to be sacrificed in the
orgy as the Bride of the Spirit of the Banana, because
Marufa had discovered by divination that two syllables
of her name were those of the secret name which only
the King-God knew, of the Unmentionable One, the
Usa<hi rend="font-style: italic">kuma</hi>.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD09" type="chapter">
<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 9</hi>
</head>

<p>Before the green tent strutted a sentry as
pompously as if he were on duty before the
Kommandant&rsquo;s bungalow. Inside, sprawling in a
camp chair, was the corporal, in blue striped pyjamas,
smoking a cigarette. Upon the floor crouched one
of his women with a safety razor stuck in her woolly
thatch, opening a can of beef. On the camp table
were a bottle of brandy which had had its neck knocked
off, a shaving mirror and an open tin of cigarettes.
Squatting on the bed was another woman in field
boots, cleaning up a can of salmon with one finger.
The rest of the tent was a litter of broken cases, bottles,
cans and papers.</p>

<p>Ten yards away under the thorn shrub, lay Birnier,
and near to him were Mungongo and the others.
Mungongo&rsquo;s regard shuttled between this scene in
the tent and the white man with a mingled expression
of terror and amazement: terror at the temerity
of the corporal in treating a white in such a manner
and incredulous bewilderment that the white did not
immediately strike them all dead. But the others,
more sophisticated to the white man&rsquo;s ways, were
solely occupied in envying the corporal&rsquo;s debauch.</p>

<p>The mauve shadows turned to blue as they lengthened.
The clouds of small flies thinned and their
ranks began to be refilled by the mosquitoes. Birnier
lay with his back to the tent with a fly switch of grass,
<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>
but he watched the doings of the corporal covertly.
The corporal and his women had been drinking a good
deal of the brandy and now he was supplying generous
quantities to his men. Once he had come out to
jeer. Birnier had taken no notice, nor even of the
kick implanted by one of his own field boots on the
foot of the woman. Already there was a bloodshot
glint in the corporal&rsquo;s yellow eyes and a pronounced
uncertainty in his movements. Whether the man
had had any particular instructions regarding the
manner of his death Birnier did not know until he
became loquacious and took to shouting insults at
his white prisoner. The great white chief had given
the white man to him as a slave, he yelled, and now
he was going to take him home with him. This idea
seemed to tickle him vastly and also his women, who
giggled and applauded as the corporal began to describe
what obscene acts they would make their white dog
perform every day, what they would give him to eat,
how he should be made to dance.</p>

<p>They grew noisier and the women began to sing
lewd songs. The soldiers too revealed signs of their
frequent potations. Soon the whole crowd would
go mad, Birnier knew, and sooner or later collapse,
which would give him a chance to escape, unless they
chained him, or, what was far more probable, they
decided to bait him to death during an orgy. What
they would probably do to him was unthinkable.
Somehow he must find a way out by self-destruction.
Even should he escape, he would be unarmed and
without food, and there was every possibility that
they would trail and overtake him in the morning. He
was lame and footsore; also he was weak from want
<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>
of food. Once, when despoiling his chop boxes, the
corporal had contemptuously thrown him a half
eaten tin of sardines and a cigarette. He let the
cigarette lie. Nourishment he must have; and so
after an inward struggle he had eaten it, having to
claw out the fish like a monkey, while the big black
and his women sprawled and laughed.</p>

<p>The soldiers, except the one on sentry who still
paced a trifle erratically, were grouped on their
haunches around the fire in front of the tent on the
threshold of which the corporal presided with as much
pomposity as if he were the great Mogul, all drinking
and smoking and eating. Now and again the women
would screech insults over their heads at the white;
and once the corporal threw an empty bottle at him,
evoking a gale of applause. The women began the
belly dance, crooning while the men accompanied
with the rhythmic grunt, which ever leads to hysterical
exaltation.</p>

<p>The sun was dipping. They might come for him
at any moment. He watched the sentry and contemplated
making a rush, taking a venture on the man&rsquo;s
bad aim and unsteady hand. They would not follow
him far in the dark for dread of the spirits that walk
by night. The only alternative to suicide was the
river, in flood and full of crocodiles, a slender chance.
He determined to try it. He considered making the
attempt then. But the darker the better; they
would more easily miss. At any risk he must never
let them get their hands upon him. He drew himself
together, flexing his limbs for a leap and a rush,
anxiously observing the chanting crowd around the
fire in the sunset glow.</p>
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>

<p>The leashes of discipline were fraying. The sentry
still plodded up and down, but with a rolling eye for
his companions. The working of his mind was
revealed when he walked round tying knots in the long
grass which, as every Munyamwezi knows, is a sure
method to prevent a prisoner&rsquo;s escape; then he halted
in front of Birnier, grinned, and pointed to the fire;
evidently he knew or had heard that an orgy was
coming. The man stood and watched him. Fearful
that the fellow was about to drag him over or suggest
that the victim be seized, if only in order to release
him from his irksome duty, Birnier snatched up the
cigarette lying in the grass and asked for a light to
distract the man&rsquo;s attention. The sentry shook his
head and pointed to the fire. Hastily Birnier
searched his pockets for a match; recollected that he
had used the last, and took out a small tin box of wax
vestas wrapped in oiled silk which he kept as a reserve
in a special pouch of his belt. In the very act of
striking the match Birnier ejaculated: <q>God!</q></p>

<p><q>Nini?</q> demanded the sentry.</p>

<p><q>I burned myself,</q> returned Birnier.</p>

<p><q>Nothing to what you will soon!</q> retorted the
nigger, grinning, made an obscene suggestion and
swaggered across to the fire.</p>

<p>Birnier cursed his own stupidity as he thought
swiftly. If Mungongo and the others ran at the same
time the numbers would confuse the soldiers the
more. He spoke across to Mungongo in the Wongolo
dialect, hoping that the Munyamwezi would not
understand.</p>

<p><q>Let thy heart be like unto the bullet of my big
gun, and obey me! When I throw up in the air this
<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>
cigarette, thou shalt run and plunge into the river,
but not into the depth; lie hidden in the reeds of the
bank until thou shalt hear a frog croak thrice and then
once. Come out and go to the frog, and be not afraid,
for thou shalt see me in the spirit form. Dost understand?</q></p>

<p><q>Truly, my master!</q></p>

<p><q>Tell the washenzie that they also obey or shall
my spirit eat them up as it shall these children of
dung!</q></p>

<p><q>Truly, master!</q></p>

<p>Birnier glanced at the horizon. The shadows had
melted into the violet twilight, which in equatorial
Africa is almost as short as the snuffing of a candle.
The stars were popping out. Dusky forms were
circling round the yellow of the fire which threw
pale flickers on the figure of Corporal Inyira, revealing
the beginning of the hysterical gleam in the yellows
of his eyes as, reverting to habit, he squatted on his
haunches in the chair. They might make a rush for
the victims at any moment. The sentry, excitement
overcoming discipline, was, rifle still in hand, dancing
round the outskirts of the throng.</p>

<p>Birnier threw the cigarette towards Mungongo.
As he dived round the thorn bush he heard the rustle
of movement and the <q>boy&rsquo;s</q> gasped exclamation to
the others. The bank of the river was not fifteen
yards away. On the brink Birnier crouched and
listened. He heard a splash a little to the right, which
was Mungongo or one of the others literally obeying
his instructions.</p>

<p>The mosquitoes buzzed and stung in clouds. A
cricket shrilled persistently above the chorus of the
<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>
frogs and the throb of the hand-drum and the chanting.
The sentry had not yet discovered the flight; he was
probably drunker than Birnier had guessed. By
raising himself on his hands he could see the gleam
of the fire and the inverted V of the tent through the
scrub. He hesitated whether to begin operations
immediately or wait until after they had discovered
the flight and were further intoxicated. Yet the
excitement of the loss of the prisoner might sober
them a little, Birnier reflected. No, it did not matter
even if they were completely sober. The spirits of
the night would be perhaps more real to them then
than when they were drugged by alcohol. Yet he
would wait. They might come as far as the river
with lanterns and should he be compelled to take to
the water he would have to take the risk of crocodiles
seizing him. Almost had he begun to curse the
askaris for being so slow, when a rifle cracked and a
bullet hummed over his head.</p>

<p>He scrambled hastily down the bank, thinking for
a moment that he had been spotted. But it must
have been a random shot. The chanting ceased. A
hoarse shout from the sentry was echoed by uproar
from the others.</p>

<p>Birnier crawled up the bank cautiously and peered.
He could not see well, for one eye was nearly closed
by mosquito bites, but he could make out vague
forms passing and repassing across the glow of the
fire. Lights glimmered. Amid shouts and yells,
figures began to advance towards the river. Whether
the water was deep or shallow he could not know;
only could he make out in the sheen of the stars a
dark patch of reed or bushes for some yards. He slid
<pb n="112"/><anchor id="Pg112"/>
down the slope as noiselessly as possible, although the
pursuers were making noise enough to scare all the
spirits in Africa. He sank to his chest, standing on
stones. He waded out a little, buried his head and
shoulders behind a half-submerged bush, and remained
still.</p>

<p>For some time he could only hear the shouts and
yells. He kept the water up to his chin and continuously
splashed his face in the endeavour to slacken the
efforts of the mosquitoes. The cries approached.
He saw men outlined against the stars and then some
gleams of lanterns. Something stirred ponderously
near to him. It might be a crocodile, but he dared
not move. The figures seemed to stay on the top of
the bank for hours. He remained rigid, expecting a
swirl of water and teeth.</p>

<p>Suddenly a spurt of flame shot out above him and
was followed by a fusillade of shots in the direction
of up river. Had they spotted Mungongo or were
they merely letting drive at a bush or the spirits in
general? The latter was most probable. The water
swirled near to him. All his will power was required not
to leap frantically for the bank. Yet a crocodile would
be far more merciful than those black devils. Again
a swirl and something passed close to him at high speed.
Probably an otter scared by the firing; at any rate it
was not a crocodile. The lights and figures on the
bank disappeared.</p>

<p>Shots rang out again, and were followed by a wild
outburst of yelling. Birnier began to wade for the
bank, continually splashing water at the mosquitoes
which were so thick that they reminded him of the
bayou Lafourche in far-off Louisiana. Crouching,
<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>
he waited on the edge of the bank to listen. The
corporal might have had enough sense to post men in
the grass. Yet he might be too fuddled to think of
that, and no native would willingly stay there in the
dark, unless under white discipline. Voices still
muttered, but they sounded as if from the camp.
Had they given him up for the night, relying on the
chance that if he had not been taken by a crocodile
they could trail him in the morning? Probably.</p>

<p>Birnier squatted in the water, ready to plunge back,
until he was sure they were in camp. Then as cautiously
he crawled up the bank. Through the scrub
with his uninjured eye he could make out the figures
around the yellow of the fire which had gone down
considerably. Now what would they do? He could
hear the mumble of the corporal&rsquo;s voice. Would they
be sufficiently sobered to be ready for the chase in
the morning? Birnier did not think so with that
case of brandy there; the corporal would not, at all
events. There was a scream of pain and the chatter
of women&rsquo;s voices.</p>

<p>Was the corporal punishing the sentry for having
let the prisoners escape, or were they beginning to
fight among themselves? The latter was improbable,
as non-commissioned officers are usually chosen from
petty chiefs and the men under them, as far as possible,
from their own village. Had they captured Mungongo
or one of the others? Birnier listened again. Another
scream was stoppered to a groan.</p>

<p><q>Devils!</q> muttered Birnier. Lying flat to watch
the grass and shrub tops against the stars, he gave the
frog croaks arranged, at intervals of ten seconds.
About five minutes later he saw some grass tops quiver
<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>
unnaturally. He croaked again. Came a whisper:</p>

<p><q>Is it thee, Infunyana?</q> (a name given in reference
to Birnier&rsquo;s gold fillings).</p>

<p><q>Aye.</q> A dark form glided towards him. <q>Where
are the other men?</q></p>

<p><q>I know not. I told them as thou hadst told me to
do. When thou didst give the sign, I fled and plunged
into the river.</q></p>

<p><q>Thou wast not frightened of the crocodiles?</q></p>

<p><q>Nay; for I have a mighty charm against all river
beasts, enchanted by Bakahenzie, the greatest of
magicians.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> commented Birnier, contorting his swollen
lips in the dark, <q>would that I had such an
one! Thinkest thou that the men did as they were
bidden?</q></p>

<p><q>Who knows what is in the heart of a goat?</q>
returned Mungongo contemptuously, for they were of
another tribe.</p>

<p><q>Ah, listen!</q></p>

<p>The mutter of the hand-drum grew swifter as
a high tenor chanted to the accompaniment of the
abdominal grunting and the laryngeal shrilling:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 1" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;We have come from afar from the Place of the waters!</l>
  <l>From the place where dwells the mighty Eater-of-Men!</l>
  <l>Hard was the road as the hills of Kilimanjaro!</l>
  <l>Hot was the sun as the wrath of Inyira the bold!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">The son of Banyala!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! &hellip; Ough!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-h!</l>
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 1" type="chant">
  <l>But strong are we still as the trunk of an elephant!</l>
  <l>For have we not walked in the shade of a great chief!</l>
  <l>Blacker and fiercer than the male rhinoceros!</l>
  <l>Swifter and more terrible than the mother of whelps?</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">The son of Banyala!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! &hellip; Ough!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-h!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 1" type="chant">
  <l>What hath he given us to tickle our spears?</l>
  <l>A dainty white dog whose meat is so tender!</l>
  <l>Fattened and groomed by the Eater-of-Men!</l>
  <l>A gift from the great Chief to his ally and friend.</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">The son of Banyala!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! &hellip; Ough!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-h!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 1" type="chant">
  <l>We will tickle his white flesh with the tongue of our spears!</l>
  <l>Our women shall pluck out his hair and his manhood!</l>
  <l>He shall dance to our liking in the midst of the fire!</l>
  <l>His girl screams for mercy shall lave hungry ears of <corr
     sic=""><anchor id="E11"/><ref target="e11">&qdash;!</ref></corr></l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">The son of Banyala!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! &hellip; Ough!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15"> <corr sic="E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-h"><anchor
     id="E12"/><ref target="e12">E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-h</ref></corr>!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 1" type="chant">
  <l>Great was the gift of the great Eater-of-Men!</l>
  <l>A white slave so sleek to dance the dance of the ants!</l>
  <l>Eh! We&rsquo;ll slit up his nostrils and pull out his hairs!</l>
  <l>A white slave and four black ones to wait on one great chief!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">The son of Banyala!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! &hellip; Ough!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-h!</l>
</lg>
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>

<p><q>Those children of folly have not obeyed,</q>
whispered Birnier. <q>The time is come.&hellip; Wait
here for me, O Mungongo. I go to take my spirit
form. When I return be not afraid!</q></p>

<p><q>Truly,</q> answered Mungongo, as Birnier crawled
away and down the bank. By the water&rsquo;s edge he
swiftly stripped himself to his moccasins and taking out
the wax vestas, damped each precious one and carefully
rubbed lines over his face and body, endeavouring to
get the most distinctive phosphorescent effect around
the eyes. Leaving his clothes he crawled back to
Mungongo.</p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> exclaimed Mungongo in a muffled scream
when he saw the glowing apparition. Birnier heard
the rustle of grass. As the boy stood up to run he
leaped and pulled him down savagely.</p>

<p><q>Be quiet, thou fool!</q> he whispered. <q>It is I.
Be silent!</q></p>

<p><q>Eh! Eh!</q> gasped Mungongo, who was trembling
violently.</p>

<p><q>If thou dost not be quiet will I tie up thy heart,</q>
threatened Birnier.</p>

<p>Mungongo continued to quiver, but he remained
passive.</p>

<p><q>Eh! Eh!</q> he gasped, <q>truly thou art a more
mighty magician than Bakahenzie.</q></p>

<p><q>Be quiet!</q></p>

<p>The drums and the song were still going and the
chant had become more obscene.</p>

<p><q>Follow me!</q> whispered Birnier, when Mungongo
was more reassured.</p>

<p>They made a detour. As they drew near they could
hear muffled screams and groans beneath the howl of
<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>
the chorus and song. The mighty son of Banyala and
his merry men were so engrossed in the orgy that
Birnier could have walked right up to the fire before
anyone would have seen him. But he would not take
any unnecessary risk. Leaving Mungongo outside he
crawled under the back flap of the tent. Crouched
there he paused. The tent was empty; for all were
engaged in the dance. His two shot-guns and two
light rifles were stacked in the corner and the big
express which the corporal had appropriated, leaned
against the tent door behind the chair. He glanced
hurriedly around for ammunition, but he could not see
any open, and he had left his belt of cartridges with his
clothes. Outside the men and women were circling
in contrary directions, each with a spear, a knife or a
firebrand in hand, around the fire beside which, trussed
like bundles of faggots, were the four servants, their
feet singeing on the outside hot ashes.</p>

<p>For a second Birnier hesitated. He could not know
whether any of the guns was loaded. The fire was of
glowing embers which did not throw much light into
the tent. Swiftly Birnier rose and glided into his own
chair in the deep shadow of the tent flap. Then
summoning all his nerve he uttered a yell and began to
shout the first song which he could recollect:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="song">
  <l>&ldquo;Hurrah! Hurrahhhhhhh! It is the Jubileeeee!</l>
  <l>Hurrah! Hurrah! the flag that set you free!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>The native minstrel stopped in the middle of his
chant; the whole shuffling, grunting crowd was
petrified in as many different poses. Birnier leaped
to his feet waving his arms wildly, yelling:</p>
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="song">
  <l>&ldquo;Thus we sang the chor-uss from Atlanta to the Sea-aa!</l>
  <l>As we &hellip;<corr sic=""><anchor id="E13"/><ref
    target="e13">&rdquo;</ref></corr></l>
</lg>

<p>But before he had gotten to <q>Georgia,</q> only the
prostrate forms around the fire had not fled.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD10" type="chapter">
<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 10</hi>
</head>

<p>On the morning of Birnier&rsquo;s departure there was
much movement in Ingonya station. Every sign
of preparation for the expedition had been carefully
concealed while a stranger was in the vicinity. Trumpets
blared importantly. On the great parade ground
companies were formed, long lines of rigid, ebon
figures, down which strolled zu Pfeiffer inspecting
personally kits and rifles. Afterwards they were
drawn up before the flag-pole. In an address zu
Pfeiffer informed them that they served under a
greater Bwana than he, the greatest Bwana in the
countries of the white or the black, who was the son of
Ngai (an uncertain term meaning <q>son of God</q> or
the <q>son of nobody</q>); that the flag they bore, the
brother of the big one upon the pole, was so powerful
in magic that none could withstand it, the Totem of
the Bwana Mkubwa Kuba. No wives were allowed for
black or white, and he himself set them the example;
for they were embarking on a war expedition to take a
country which they knew was full of ivory, cattle and
women.</p>

<p>The row upon row of eyes in black faces bulged, as
from the mass came the long grunt of assent and
allegiance. The three white sergeants barked at their
various companies, which wheeled into column formation
and marched past zu Pfeiffer beneath the flag in
review order, their alignment and precision a credit to
<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>
their drill masters. Down below the fort on the
mouth of the bayou Sergeant Ludwig superintended
the overhauling of the steam-launch, and a native
sergeant and a file of men overseered lines of carriers
bearing white men&rsquo;s provisions, the bulk of which was
zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s personal supplies. Around the launch
was a flotilla of native canoes in charge of a small
crowd of nude Kavirondo paddlers, jabbering at the
prospect of a war expedition.</p>

<p>Most of the day zu Pfeiffer spent in the orderly room
going over documents and giving detailed instructions
to the grizzled Sergeant Schneider, who was to take
over the station with fifty of the least competent men,
pending the arrival of an officer, which again would
depend upon the success of the expedition. In zu
Pfeiffer&rsquo;s manner was evident the controlled excitement
of a boy on the eve of a house match, and indeed for
him it was the game for which he was bred and lived,
<q>das Kriegspiel.</q> Perpetually his long fingers caressed
the sentry moustaches; an unusual glitter was in his
blue eyes.</p>

<p>The personality of
<corr sic="Bernier"><anchor id="E14"/><ref
target="e14">Birnier</ref></corr>
had been apparently
wiped from his mind as a spoor in the sand by rain;
indeed in addition to the competing excitement of the
expedition, the previous night&rsquo;s alcoholic and sentimental
debauch had served to exhaust the emotions
stimulated by jealousy. To him had appeared an
obstruction in his emotional life in the shape of the
husband of the woman whom he adored; therefore,
according to his nature and training, he had endeavoured
to remove that obstacle as swiftly and as
efficiently as possible. Superlative confidence in himself,
reflected in his pride of family and nationality,
<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>
the apotheosis of which was the Kaiser, enabled him to
devote all his energies to the business in hand, never
doubting that his interpretation of native psychology
would ensure the extinction of his adversary.</p>

<p>Beyond the mere joy of the game of war was present
the fundamental impulse to win the approval of the All
Highest by gaining another place in the sun as well as
the half-suppressed conviction that such a distinction
would naturally further his suit in love. In the orbit
of these two poles revolved the life actions of zu
Pfeiffer.</p>

<p>That evening zu Pfeiffer dined as leisurely and as
sumptuously as usual; drank his port and smoked his
cigar while his servants packed the last of his kitchen
battery. Then at the first green of the moon he gave
the order to march.</p>

<p>The three companies of askaris fell in, marched down
to the bayou and embarked without fuss or confusion,
each group under a non-commissioned officer to the
appointed canoe.</p>

<p>The launch laboured busily out of the bayou past
misty reed-girt islands into the indolent waters of the
great lake, dragging after her the fleet of forty odd
canoes. A cigar under the awning of the tiny poop
suggested a great firefly in the blue shadows, where
lounged zu Pfeiffer with his favourite brandy and
seltzer at his elbow.</p>

<p>Resembling an enormous water-fowl leading a strange
black brood, the launch towed the flotilla through the
night. A war chant pulsed like a fevered heart as the
moon upon her back lazily chased the stars into the dawn
upon her way to her home in the Mountains of the
Moon, to be in turn extinguished by a furious sun.
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>
And all that day, while incandescent heat tried to boil
illimitable waters, the strange fowl waddled on with her
noxious brood. Huddled in the cramped canoes the
soldiers slept and snuffed and sang, to which zu
Pfeiffer contentedly listened beneath the awning.
Three times grey walls of falling water enveloped
them, sending frantic black hands to bailing. Once
more the moon made the skies to laugh. When the sun
had played his part of a flaming Nemesis, a fringe grew
upon the horizon like the stubble upon a white man&rsquo;s
chin.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer had calculated to arrive at the village of
Timballa just within the river at sundown. The
headman came down to the strand to meet them.
Immediately he was seized, and the soldiers, as joyous
and as mischievous as children released from school,
surrounded the village.</p>

<p>Sitting in full uniform upon the poop of the launch,
together with the two sergeants, zu Pfeiffer held a
shauri and demanded sufficient paddlers to man his
forty canoes. The headman, to whom all white men
were alike, thought they were British and hastened to
proffer his services, promising that the Bwana should
have the men within two days. Zu Pfeiffer curtly
ordered him to procure them before the sun was
overhead on the next day; and to insure that he was
obeyed, detained him as hostage and forbade any man
to pass his line of pickets around the village. The old
man protested that they had not sufficient men in the
village, but zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s spies had afforded him
practically correct information. He gave the headman
the right to send a number of messengers, each
accompanied by a soldier, to the neighbouring villages
<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>
and promised him fifty lashes and to rase his village, if
the paddlers were not forthcoming.</p>

<p>Solely because he wished to give his men time to
recover from their stiffness did he not insist upon
starting that night upon the river trip. As a good
commander he considered his men from every point
of view of efficiency. They loved him. He was a
warrior chief as they understood such to be; carefully
he fostered their warrior pride; never were they
ordered to work at menial offices, to fetch or to carry;
only to drill and to fight; his punishments were
ferocious, but he gave them liberty in pillage and rape.
Eh! but the Eater-of-Men was a mighty chief! and
of his name they boasted to every man.</p>

<p>With foresight he had demanded twice as many men
as he needed, knowing that the panic-stricken chief
would round up the halt, the blind, and the sick. By
an hour after the stipulated time they were assembled
in the village, a motley crew. Those of the most
powerful physique he selected to man the soldiers&rsquo;
canoes, and the next in competency he allotted to the
baggage canoes.</p>

<p>They started immediately. They made about two
and a half miles an hour, for although the river was
swollen it was sluggish and slow streamed, tortuous.
Each canoe load of soldiers was made responsible for
the paddlers and the speed was set by zu Pfeiffer in a
large canoe with Sakamata as guide. Never had those
paddlers driven canoes so speedily and persistently.
At sundown they halted in a convenient bend where
there was no village near; pickets were set on the bank
and no other man allowed to land, no lights and no
talking. They were ordered to rest.</p>
<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>

<p>At the first glint of the moon they started again.
The canoes were hauled by the aid of the soldiers over
the slight rapids which divided the river into pools in
the dry season. Throughout the night the misty
forest and swamp slipped by to the perpetual rhythm
of the paddles. About the hour of the monkey a
hippopotamus charged the flotilla and upset two boats.
Zu Pfeiffer forbade any shooting, nor would he permit
the expedition a moment&rsquo;s delay to pick up the
occupants. Just as they heard the distant crowing of
cocks from the village for which they were bound, four
paddlers collapsed. The soldiers, acting on their own
initiative, threw them overboard to swim if they could,
and took the paddles themselves. Afterwards they
were thrashed for disobedience to orders in having
given a possible chance for one of the men to escape
to warn the Wongolo. At an hour after sunrise they
arrived at the village. The majority of the paddlers
were so exhausted that they dropped in the canoes and
had to be thrown ashore, where they lay inert, their
backs, bloody with the urgent bayonet pricks, caking in
the sun.</p>

<p>Beyond this point the river was not navigable, but the
village was upon the Wongolo border and within two
days or fifteen hours&rsquo; continuous march of MFunya
MPopo&rsquo;s (as zu Pfeiffer knew it). Zu Pfeiffer adopted
the same tactics to procure porters. But to the chief,
in case he should require his services again, he gave an
extravagant present and left bales of cloth for the
carriers upon their return. Zu Pfeiffer and Sergeant
Ludwig travelled in machilas (hammocks) each with a
crew of six; the soldiers carried nothing save their
rifles, double cartridge belts, a day&rsquo;s rations; the pick
<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>
of the carriers bore ammunition and the two
<corr sic="Nordenfelts"><anchor id="E15"/><ref
target="e15">Nordenfeldts</ref></corr>
and two pom-poms slung upon poles, and the chop
boxes; the men&rsquo;s blankets and the heavy stuff were to
follow more slowly under Sergeant Schultz and fifty
men. The country between this village and MFunya
MPopo&rsquo;s was mostly forest and very sparsely inhabited,
which afforded some shade and concealment, and
lessened the risk of a warning being given.</p>

<p>The expedition started at noon. The carriers were
kept on the native shuffling lope by the aid of attentions
from the askaris. Two unfortunate small villages
which lay on the line of march were surrounded and
the inhabitants massacred. Twenty porters collapsed;
they were bayoneted to prevent any chance of a
successful ruse in escaping to give the alarm, and their
loads given to relay men brought for that purpose. The
column halted at sundown. The men ate their rations,
but the carriers were too exhausted to eat; they
drank water and lay prostrate. According to Sakamata
they were within two hands&rsquo; breadth of the moon of
Kawa Kendi&rsquo;s.</p>

<p>In full uniform of white, girded with sword and
revolver, zu Pfeiffer ate, drank, and smoked cigars until
the forest roof was patterned against the cold pallor
of the moon. Then, after giving final instructions to
Sergeant Ludwig and the various native non-commissioned
officers, he ordered the jabbering men to
march, with the carriers staggering on at the point of
the bayonet.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD11" type="chapter">
<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 11</hi>
</head>

<p>The doom pronounced by the Council of Witch-Doctors
was to Bakuma and all concerned as a
Bull of Excommunication in medi&aelig;val Europe. MYalu
was the one who exhibited the most emotion. Had he
not paid seven tusks of good ivory to have the object
of his passion placed under the most terrible tabu?
Against Marufa, who had seemingly betrayed him, was
his anger directed. But the rage of MYalu was
tempered with fear. A man had not merely to kill an
enemy: he had also to appease his justly wrathful
ghost; and who knew what the disembodied spirit
of the most powerful magician in the land, save
Bakahenzie, could do! Moreover, no other wizard
would give him absolution in the form of the magic
of purification. A chief though he be; he dared not
slay a magician. He sought Marufa and found him
as usual squatting on his threshold contemplating
infinity in a mud wall. He saluted Marufa politely,
choking back words of bitter recrimination, for if he
even offended him, the wizard might cast a spell upon
him instantly. Marufa returned the greeting as
courteously as ever. When at length MYalu reproachfully
reminded him of the seven tusks which he had
paid apparently to secure his love&rsquo;s terrible fate,
Marufa replied uninterestedly:</p>

<p><q>I have done that for which thou hast paid.</q></p>

<p><q>What man buyeth a bride for another?</q> retorted
MYalu.</p>
<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>

<p><q>When I did make magic upon &lsquo;the things&rsquo; did I
place in the power of the spirits the owner. Behold,
hath not the owner of &lsquo;the things&rsquo; been accursed?</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> gasped MYalu. <q>But how may that
be? Didst thou not thyself take the paring and the
hair?</q></p>

<p><q>I bade the One who is tabu to bring them that he
might be bewitched to her girdle. She thought to
deceive me by bringing that which was of herself.</q></p>

<p><q>E&mdash;eh!</q> muttered MYalu, impressed at the awful
effect of deceiving a wizard. Marufa continued to
stare. MYalu meditated ruefully.</p>

<p><q>But the tusks,</q> murmured MYalu at length
dismally.</p>

<p><q>It is not I who have two tongues,</q> responded
Marufa indifferently.</p>

<p>And with that MYalu had to rest content. Marufa
indeed had no interest at all in the passions of Zalu
Zako, MYalu and Bakuma. Merely the time had come
for the witch-doctors to choose the victim for the
Harvest Festival: Bakuma was young and good
looking, a dainty morsel that should please the taste
of the officiating doctors, and her owner and uncle
was a man of no importance: so accordingly he had
made known the sin of her name through the divination.</p>

<p>In the solitude of his own hut upon the hill Zalu
Zako sat and pondered sulkily. His young and fierce
temper was stimulated and the seed of rebellion
against the domination of the priesthood was quickened
by the fate of his new love; although the masonic
secrets of the craft were denied to him, he, as son of
the royal house, was suspicious of the powers of the
<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>
Unmentionable One and the priesthood, as many an
one had been before him; yet in spite of that the
verdict was absolute, for he was too crushed by terror
of the consequences to permit of any hope of annulling
it.</p>

<p>The fiat not only doomed Bakuma to a terrible death
at the third blooming of the moon, but from that very
instant the tabu came into force; for being thus
accursed by the possession of two sounds of the sacred
name, she was deemed unholy. Her half-sisters and
their mother, with whom Bakuma shared the hut, fled
to another and were exorcised by the wizard, which, as
everybody knows, is an expensive ceremony; gourds
and pots, spoons and utensils of all sorts, were left to
the sole use of the unclean one and would be burned
upon her demise. A magic line was drawn around the
hut out of which the soul of the girl as she slept could
not escape to bewitch anybody. Neither her name nor
anything that had been hers would be ever mentioned
again; any word of a household article or any thing or
beast which had one syllable of the name <q>Bakuma</q>
was changed, lest the user be accursed and bewitched.</p>

<p>For the whole day, in this isolation, sat the girl
Bakuma, Marufa&rsquo;s useless love charm clutched in her
hand, as bewildered as if the earth had suddenly turned
inside out under this fact so stupendous and stupefying.
She did not weep. She squatted in the door, her eyes
staring with the glazed inquiring expression of a dying
gazelle, a bronze question to Fate. At the feeding
time her mother threw her bananas into the circle.
Bakuma looked at them as they flopped near to her as
if she did not realize what they were. She made no
stir to cook or prepare them. The cool twilight came
<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>
and passed like a blue breath. Above the insectile
chorus of the night beneath the crystal stars came the
faint thrumming of a drum from MKoffo&rsquo;s hill. The
sound of music and dancing reminded Bakuma of her
ambitious dreams. She could neither weep nor wail;
she merely emitted a faint gasping sound. But her
mind began to work jerkily, yet more fluently. Visions
of the form of Zalu Zako were weaved and spun in the
darkness: the lithe walk of him, the haughty carriage
of the head. Slowly greened the sky until the banana
fronds were etched in sepia against the swollen moon.
The dismal croak of the Baroto bird shattered the black
cocoon of Bakuma&rsquo;s mind.</p>

<p><q>Aie-eee! the foul bird of my despair!</q> she
wailed, and at last wept. Then she rose and flitted like
some green ghost into the plantation and across to the
place of water where her lover had first spoken her
sweet, recking naught in her mist of despair of spirits
of the night nor of the breaking of the magic circle.
The moon spattered the squatted form with blue
spangles and turned the falling tears to quivering opals.
Bakuma broke into wild lament.</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;The black Goat hath cried three times in my hut!</l>
  <l>My soul hath wandered and been caught in a trap!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>A wizard hath stolen a hair from my head!</l>
  <l>The beak of Baroto pecketh my gall!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>A rival hath lain in wait for my love!</l>
  <l>She hath slain my bird in the nest of his breast!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>
<pb n="130"/><anchor id="Pg130"/>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>A porcupine dwells in the place of my heart!</l>
  <l>The bird of my soul is fluttering faint!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>An ember of fire hath entered my mouth!</l>
  <l>The milk of my breasts is curdled to-night!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>The strings of my bosom are tied with fine knots!</l>
  <l>My belly is void! My nipples are dead!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>A monkey hath bitten the back of my tongue!</l>
  <l>Hath stolen my breath to make magic by night!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>The blood in my veins hath turned to sour porridge!</l>
  <l>My throat is choked up by the sudd of the Lake!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>A grey forest rat hath swallowed my heart!</l>
  <l>My thighs have been scratched by a poisonous thorn!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeee!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>As the last quiver of the wail blended with the
anthem of the forest came from a figure squatted above
the ford of the river, his spear a blue flame in the
moonlight, an answer:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;My love hath been taken by a greater than I!</l>
  <l>Her flesh will be tasted by a hungrier mouth!</l>
  <l>Her flesh which is sweeter than honey and wine!</l>
  <l>Her flesh which is softer than a newly born kid!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! My spear is bent!</l>
</lg>
<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>My love hath been taken by a greater than I!</l>
  <l>Her breasts will be pillowed by a much broader chest!</l>
  <l>Her breasts which do swell like a tender young gourd!</l>
  <l>Her breasts which are as firm as the meat of the plum!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! My spear is bent!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>And answered Bakuma&rsquo;s wail:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 17" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;<corr sic="Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee"><anchor id="E17"/><ref
  target="e17">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee</ref></corr>!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;My love hath been taken by a greater than I!</l>
  <l>Her chines will be gripped by a far fiercer hand!</l>
  <l>Her chines which are smoother than elephants&rsquo; tusks!</l>
  <l>Her chines which are as plump as the breast of a fowl!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! My spear is bent!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15"><corr sic="Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee"><anchor
  id="E18"/><ref target="e18">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee</ref></corr>!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>My love hath been taken by a greater than I!</l>
  <l>Her eyes will be touched by longer fingers than mine!</l>
  <l>Her eyes which are like unto moons veiled by rain!</l>
  <l>Her eyes which are like the starlit river at dawn!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! My spear is bent!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>My love hath been taken by a greater than I!</l>
  <l>Her scent will be drunk by nostrils broader than mine!</l>
  <l>Her scent which is pungent and sweet like the smoke!</l>
  <l>Her scent which slakes thirst more than driest of beer!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! My spear is bent!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>My love hath been taken by a greater than I!</l>
  <l>Her breath will be sipped by a thirstier throat!</l>
  <pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>
  <l>Her breath which is hotter than the flame of a fire!</l>
  <l>Her breath which makes more drunken than enemies&rsquo; blood!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! My spear is bent!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>My love hath been taken by a greater than I!</l>
  <l>Her voice will be heard by ears mightier than mine!</l>
  <l>Her voice which is like unto burbling beer!</l>
  <l>Her voice which is gentler than the rustle of fronds!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Ough! My spear is bent!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>A slight breeze stirred gently the trees. The
crickets shrilled their perpetual chorus. A crocodile
flopped in the river. Dogs yapped from a village down
the river. Again Bakuma lifted up her voice:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Mightier than elephants was the tread of my man!</l>
  <l>Keener than a leopard was the flash of his eye!</l>
  <l>Stronger than an oak tree was the strength of his arm!</l>
  <l>Swifter than lightning was the stroke of his spear!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Enemies died!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>Taller than the wine palm was the height of my man!</l>
  <l>Broader than the temple was the span of his chest!</l>
  <l>More graceful than antelope was the carriage of him!</l>
  <l>More slender than saplings was the build of his legs!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Women lamented!</l>
</lg>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>Sweeter than warm honey was the scent of my man!</l>
  <l>Whiter than a spear flash was the gleam of his teeth!</l>
  <l>Fiercer than scorpions was the grip of his hand!</l>
  <l>Smooth and like stone was&qdash;&rdquo;</l>
</lg>
<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>

<p>A gale of yells and shots destroyed the song of Bakuma
like a foot crushing a flower.</p>

<p>Zalu Zako leaped to his feet and stood for a moment
listening intently. Across the river some strange
beast spat spears of red flames. A little farther
down another beast coughed violently like a hippopotamus.
The sky seemed falling. Such volumes of
sound he had never heard before.</p>

<p>As he raced with the speed of a koodoo through the
plantation he saw the glow of fire ahead and heard the
moan of some terrible monster near him. He leaped
five feet in the air as the world appeared to crack in half
beside him. He felt a sting like a brand of fire in his
shoulder, but he ran on towards the village from whence
fled dim figures on all sides amid shouts and screams
and wailing.</p>

<p>Several huts were already blazing. The leviathan
coughed and moaned again and once more the earth
seemed to crash to pieces near him. Appalled and
bewildered, choking with rage, he reached the outer
enclosure where his fellow warriors were shouting and
yelling that the white gods were attacking. Bakahenzie,
gun in hand, was bidding them charge they knew not
what. Then out of the clutter of the village broke
line upon line of yelling figures clothed in uniform.
Screaming the battle-cry, the warriors charged, led by
Zalu Zako, Bakahenzie, and Kawa Kendi, who in the
excitement had dashed from the enclosure. Howls and
yells were drowned in the spiteful crackle and cough.
Warriors were mown like weeds under a sickle.
Scarce a hundred scrambled inside the enclosure at
the rallying call from Bakahenzie.</p>

<p>Again came a short rush of those uniformed figures;
<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>
again scarlet spears pierced the green moonlight like a
hailstorm; small red flames rippled in a line resembling
a forest fire as the soldiers charged through and over the
palisade. Hand to hand was the fighting, spear and
sword against bayonet and rifle around the idol, the
askaris outyelling the warriors. The temple was on
fire. In the light of the flames they saw a tall figure in
white with a glow of fire in his mouth and magic eyes
upon his hands, eyes which flashed rays of scarlet and
blue as he cut and hacked at the base of the idol.&hellip;</p>

<p><q>Tarum hath come!</q> screamed some one, and as
the cry was taken up, the Unmentionable One tottered
and crashed to the ground.</p>

<p>They fled, Zalu Zako, Bakahenzie and those that
were left.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD12" type="chapter">
<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 12</hi>
</head>

<p>The village of Yagonyana, the son of Zahilazaan,
was situated some five days&rsquo; march to the north-west
of Kawa Kendi&rsquo;s, in open cattle country near
the fringe of the forest. Here were gathered nearly
every witch-doctor and warrior of the tribe. Most
of the women, children, and slaves had been sent
still farther to the west, driving the cattle before
them.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie, Zalu Zako, Marufa, and all those
warriors who had escaped from the massacre by zu
Pfeiffer were distinguished from their brethren by
circles of yellow earth around each left eye, and each
right breast and arm was smeared with red, which
is part of the ceremony of magic purification for
those who have slain, lest, as is well known, the
ghost of the dead wreak their wrath upon their
slayers.</p>

<p>The affairs of the tribe were in a parlous state. The
netting of the tabu had been tangled by the death of
the King-God, Kawa Kendi, and the unprecedented
act of the overthrow of the idol. Kawa Kendi&rsquo;s
body, which had not been recovered so that the doctors
could release his unhappy soul, might be used to make
more magic against the tribe.</p>

<p>For three weeks there had been much discussion
among the doctors, the chiefs, and the people.
Opinions were at variance; no two men could agree.
<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>
Lesser wizards, who before had been content with the
perquisites of the smaller offices, were now made
drunken by the insecurity of Bakahenzie&rsquo;s position.
Each of the doctors, seeing a chance to prove his superior
merit and win Bakahenzie&rsquo;s post as chief doctor, had
busily made magic to destroy the usurper, and each
and every one provided a different reason for the failure
thereof. Every day came news of the doings of the
white god with eyes upon his hands, of shootings and
floggings, of the burning of the village including the
idol, the temple, and the sacred tombs of MFunya
MPopo, of MKoffo, of MZrakombinyana, and other
kings before them.</p>

<p>The council of the craft could not even decide
whether Zalu Zako was to be King-God or not.
Bakahenzie, whose interest lay in supporting the
dynasty of the present royal family, maintained that
he should be anointed forthwith. But with the
downfall of the idol and his own impotence to make
successful magic, Bakahenzie&rsquo;s prestige had been badly
shaken; no longer dared he issue dicta autocratically.
As ever, political ambition tore patriotism to
shreds.</p>

<p>Marufa, former close ally of Bakahenzie, but lacking
his active principle, continued to mutter incantations
most impressively by himself, waiting cautiously to
see which side of the river the arrow fell. Bakahenzie
became seriously alarmed at the growth of Yabolo&rsquo;s
faction and the indifference of Marufa. He knew well
that submission would entail the loss of his post as
well as his worldly goods; and he was aware that all
men knew that his most potent and strenuous magic
had failed as utterly as that of the youngest novice
<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>
in the craft. His only chance to retrieve a portion of
his lost reputation was to invent a more plausible excuse
for failure than any other doctor had done. He
did.</p>

<p>Although he did not know that Bakuma had broken
the magic circle of her own volition, he had the shrewd
imagination to suggest that she had either fled with
the other women during the attack or that, even if she
had stayed, the askaris would have taken her from the
hut. Therefore did he demand an assembly of the craft
and chiefs. One of the reasons, if not the reason, of
Bakahenzie&rsquo;s success, as of other witch-doctors before,
such as Savonarola, had been a faculty, inspired by, or
derived from, hysterical epilepsy, of working himself up
at will into a state of convulsion without actual loss of
consciousness and the spectacular exhibition of foam,
which no other sorcerer had been able to simulate so
successfully. Therefore Bakahenzie invoked the great
Tarum (apotheosis of ancestors&rsquo; spirits) who, through
the convulsed body, did proclaim that the disaster had
been caused by the breaking of the magic circle by one
whose name was accursed; and that only could the
magic of Bakahenzie be made potent, and the consequent
overthrow of the Eyes-in-the-hands be assured,
by the sacrifice of the victim to her destiny as the Bride
of the Banana.</p>

<p>Marufa, appreciating the shrewdness of this move,
immediately abandoned his incantations to reassume
his allegiance to the cause of Bakahenzie. The prophecy
was hailed by nearly every one as a most timely
excuse for the failure of magic in general. The
miraculous recall of the Unmentionable One now
seemed so easy of accomplishment through the
<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>
person of Bakuma that many of those who had
sided with Yabolo deserted him, foreseeing the renewed
ascendancy of Bakahenzie and fearing his
wrath.</p>

<p>Yabolo, however, made an attempt to recover the
lost adherents by protesting that the Moon of the
Harvest Festival had not yet come, and that therefore
victory could not be obtained until two more moons
had waned. But MYalu saw that by submitting to
the new god he might be able to have removed the
tabu upon Bakuma&mdash;all things were possible to one
who had overthrown the Unmentionable One&mdash;and
thus obtain her by the price of submission; also he
might possibly recover his wealth of ivory abandoned
after the massacre. Therefore did he with his people
go over to the Yabolo faction.</p>

<p>Uproar and confusion ensued. Bakahenzie recovered
from his trance with unprecedented rapidity
and even did not require to be told what the spirit of
Tarum had said through his lips. The tribe was split
into fiercer factions than ever. They argued and
screamed and cursed. Bakahenzie had lost the hold
over them; for as the god, of which he was the
sponsor, was dead, his credit had gone too. He dared
no longer to remove a troublesome brother or chief
by magic. His only hope was to restore the god:
so to that end he declared that Zalu Zako must be
anointed King-God. Uproar arose once more. But
Bakahenzie&rsquo;s purpose had been served; he had
diverted their attention from the subject of submission.</p>

<p>From time to time came terrified runners with
horrific stories of the burning of villages, of massacre
<pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>
and rapine. Bakahenzie, determined not to yield,
secretly dispatched a slave to Eyes-in-the-hands with
an arrow which is a sign of war; Yabolo, whose mind
ran in the same tracts, sent a banana which is a sign of
peace. In the meantime factions grew and multiplied.
One chief counselled his followers to take their cattle
and women and seek to conquer another tribe to the
south-west; another wished to go west. But each
and every follower began to bargain with his chief for
disproportionate rewards for service. Two chiefs and
five hundred men started to the south-west, but they
returned because they had met in their path the
skeleton of a slain elephant, which is, as everybody
knows, a sure sign of disaster.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie sent runners far and wide to discover
Bakuma. As she could not be found he concluded
that she had been killed or taken as a slave and urged
the warriors to fight. Zalu Zako immediately desired
the anointing to be delayed in order that he should
not be debarred from fighting. Bakahenzie, none
too sure of his authority, was compelled to acquiesce.
Marufa, observing that the arrow was still in the air,
took to his non-committal incantations again. Bakahenzie
strove to keep the warriors and chiefs occupied
by dissension until the result of his challenge to battle
should mature. Yabolo, equally perturbed for his
influence, did exactly the same with the banana in
view.</p>

<p>Yabolo and MYalu contemplated going in to make
submission, but the former wished to negotiate through
Sakamata for the best terms, although he tried to
persuade MYalu to go; but MYalu was suspicious and
would not do so without Yabolo. But at the hour of
<pb n="140"/><anchor id="Pg140"/>
the monkey one morning came a terrified goatherd
crying news that cut the tangled threads of their
intrigues as a sword cuts a goat&rsquo;s throat. The white
god, Eyes-in-the-hands, was within an arrow&rsquo;s flight
of the village of Yagonyana.</p>

<p>Consternation ensued. The village and the temporary
camp of grass huts buzzed and hummed. Zalu
Zako dashed out, sword and spear in hand, and in the
glow of the awakened fires harangued the warriors,
urged that they should make a swift detour through
the forest and attack the white man as he entered the
village. Bakahenzie supported this plan of campaign.
MYalu, stung by the recollection of the loss of many
tusks to the invader, incontinently abandoned Yabolo
and pressed for a frontal attack. Yabolo contended
that they send an envoy to make terms, but not very
insistently. In spite of the assurance of Sakamata, he
was suspicious of the new god&rsquo;s gentle ways. Marufa,
the wise, collected those of his household who had
remained with him, and quietly made his way to the
forest.</p>

<p>But Zalu Zako&rsquo;s martial spirit was overcome by the
clamour of those who would flee before worse befell,
crying that the white god, Eyes-in-the-hands, would
eat them all up with the terrible monsters who coughed
flames and death; others screeched that the uniformed
devils were spirits of the night and therefore invincible;
for always they came in the dark. So they hesitated,
shouted and argued. Then came a scout screaming
that the enemy was upon them, corroborated by a
vicious cough.</p>

<p>A pom-pom shell landed in the midst of the crowded
village. Zalu Zako, Bakahenzie and their small
<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>
following were nearly swept away in the rush of five
thousand odd warriors in flight. From the forest they
watched with awestruck eyes the burning of the
village.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD13" type="chapter">
<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 13</hi>
</head>

<p>On the morning on which zu Pfeiffer burned the
village of Yagonyana, Birnier was encamped upon
the southern boundary of Wongolo. By his <q>coup de
superstition</q> had he recovered all his equipment
except several bottles of brandy, some canned goods
and two and a half pairs of pyjamas; also the field
boots. The noble Inyira, son of Banyala, and his
merry men never attempted to recapture their
prisoners; no one save the Eater-of-Men in person
could have persuaded them to return to that camp
even had they had their rifles.</p>

<p>After Birnier had dressed his own foot and the
charred feet of his men, had had a good drink and a
better meal, he had sought to address the balance of his
mind through a medium designed for the cure of
melancholy, but efficacious for many other ills,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">The
Anatomy of Melancholy</hi>. He opened the one big
volume which had been his companion throughout
his travels at a page marked at haphazard by an ivory
paper knife with the American flag upon the flat hilt,
an early gift from Lucille, and began to read the remarks
of Robert Burton of quaintly glorious memory upon
the source of his late adventure.</p>

<p><q>Those which are jealous, most part, if they be
not otherwise relieved, proceed from suspicion to
hatred, from hatred to frenzy, madness, injury, murder
<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>
and despair &hellip; Amestris, Xerxes&rsquo;s wife, because
she found her husband&rsquo;s cloak in Masista&rsquo;s house,
cut off Masista&rsquo;s wife&rsquo;s paps and gave them to the
dogs, flayed her besides and cut off her ears, lips,
tongue, and slit the nose of Artaynta, her daughter.</q></p><lb/>

<p><q>Cheerful lady! She ought to have been zu
Pfeiffer&rsquo;s wife,</q> commented Birnier and went to sleep.</p>

<p>Birnier arose feeling rational enough to reconsider his
position. The recollection of the signature on the
photograph now failed to stimulate the emotional
reaction as once it had done. The experience through
which he had passed had had a beneficial effect in
breaking or disconnecting the train of suggestive
images. At first in the recess of his mind had lurked
the desire to abandon everything, to rush straight to
Lucille to demand an explanation. Now the rising
sun of reason cast quite different shadows upon the
incident. The high light was the fact that should he
do so he would be sacrificing his mission for what
might prove to be ridiculous. As his mind contemplated
the subject the echo of <q>&agrave; toi, Lucille</q> tended
to carry a high note, but this he vented by writing a
long letter to Lucille recounting the facts and frankly
admitting that he had been sufficiently insane with
jealousy to <q>go up in the air.</q> Once or twice he
ceased to write and gazed anxiously into the glare as
his imagination suggested the long period of waiting
for an answer, wondering whether the echo of that
cursed <q>&agrave; toi</q> might not become unbearably shrill.
He became a little more sentimental towards the end
of the letter, remarking that perhaps he had been
wrong in deserting her for so long and emphasising
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>
the rather ridiculous point that he was aware that he
was not a young man. However, he let it remain, and
at the first opportunity sent off the letter by runner to
the nearest station in Uganda, together with an order
for certain goods to be sent to a village on the Wongolo
border.</p>

<p>Although still inclined to be emotional over the
photograph, Birnier did not waste any energy over
vindictive thoughts upon zu Pfeiffer, whom he
philosophically regarded as irresponsible for his actions,
inasmuch as he had been made that way just as any
savage. He had gotten out of the toils set for him,
so why should he spend time and trouble in seeking
revenge which would merely consist in reporting the
incident through a British station to Washington, who
would open up interminable polite correspondence
with the German Embassy, who would again write
prodigious letters to the Colonial Minister in Berlin,
who would&hellip; Ludicrous! No; he would not
permit zu Pfeiffer to interfere with his plans. He
would continue straight to Wongolo instead of
investigating the Kivu country, where zu Pfeiffer
might perhaps have another opportunity to cause
more trouble. Accordingly he negotiated with the
nearest village for carriers and set out, striking due
west, thus approaching the Wongolo territory towards
the southern boundary.</p>

<p>The people to the south of the Wongolo country
was an inferior race, whom the Wongolo periodically
raided to replenish their slaves. These Wamongo
were split up into several petty chiefdoms, usually at
war with one another. They had no defined theology.
For they had not progressed beyond the stage of magic
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>
as far as any concept of religion, that is of praying for
intercession to any power greater than themselves;
whereas the mental state of the Wongolo was half-way
between magic and religion, mixing and confusing
the two as exemplified in the Rain-making ceremony
of employing magic and alternately invoking the god
and threatening him with dire penalties if he did not
behave. There seemed to be no royal family or clan
of the Wamongo; chiefs changed constantly as one
more powerful for the moment arose; the wizards
did not appear to have any political power, acting as
general physicians and confining their efforts apparently
to simple magic for the growing of corn, the curing of
the evil eye and wounds. They were terrified of the
Wongolo, much to Mungongo&rsquo;s pride, who never let
slip an opportunity of swaggering and bruiting abroad
the fame of his master as the greatest of magicians the
world had ever seen. Never was he tired of relating
to a grunting audience the terrible sight and effect of
his master&rsquo;s transposition into a spirit. The yarn
lost nothing in the telling.</p>

<p>Progress was slow. Every afternoon, as regular as
the sun set, clouds of sepia sailed up from the west to
clothe the world in a grey deluge of falling water.
Fortunately they were travelling up a watershed so
that there were no large rivers to cross. As they
approached the Wongolo border rumours began of a
white god with eyes upon his hands and live fire in his
mouth who, so said the delighted Wamongo, had
entirely eaten up the hated Wongolo. They seemed
prepared to accept Birnier, when suggesting that he
should make magic for them to conquer the Wongolo,
as another terrible white god, and were accordingly
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>
polite. But Mungongo, vastly indignant, denied the
story; according to him, no power on earth could
have subdued his race, except perhaps the mighty
Moonspirit (the name he had bestowed upon
Birnier).</p>

<p>But when Birnier arrived at the first village of the
Wongolo the absence of warriors corroborated the wild
tales they had heard. The inhabitants of old men,
boys and women surrounded the camp to gaze in awestruck
curiosity at the white whom they believed to be
the brother of the Eyes-in-the-hands. This calumny
Mungongo strenuously gainsaid, and anew recounted
the marvellous feats of magic of Moonspirit who could,
he assured his compatriots, eat up Eyes-in-the-hands
as easily as a crocodile would swallow a goat. Yet in
spite of their terror they insisted that Birnier must go
through the ceremony of purification incumbent upon
all strangers in order to exorcise the evil influence of
their eyes and souls; also the customary present must
be sent to the king and his august permission to enter
awaited, although no man knew where he was since
the capital had been burned. Mungongo waxed
furious. He informed them that Moonspirit was a
friend of the Son-of-the-Snake, and moreover had before
been in the country; that if they vexed Moonspirit
he would enchant the whole village so that no man
could move hand or foot. No matter, said they, that
was the rule and must be done. They were impressed
but obstinate.</p>

<p>From the description of this destroying god, who was
the colour of a stripped banana and tall as a palm tree,
had fire in his mouth and eyes upon his hands&mdash;it was
some time before he could recognise the <q>eyes</q>&mdash;and
<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>
whose companions were devils strangely clothed,
dragging horrific monsters who spat earthquakes,
Birnier had no difficulty in recognising zu Pfeiffer, and
recollected the significant pumping at dinner regarding
the Wongolo country. However he had renounced
any idea of revenge, but the discovery of friend zu
Pfeiffer as the terrifying god amused him: quickened
a desire to overset the gentleman&rsquo;s plans. He smiled
with a slight hardening of the line about his mouth
as he began to consider what might be done.</p>

<p>As far as he could estimate by recalling the size of
the native barracks at Fort Ingonya, he reckoned that
zu Pfeiffer could not possibly have more than three
hundred men, unless he had been reinforced from the
east. Roughly he calculated that the Wongolo ought
to be able to put about ten thousand warriors in the
field. That number under any sort of leadership, even
though they were only armed with spears and swords,
should wipe out the three hundred, in spite of the discipline
and two or three machine-guns, by sheer weight
of numbers. But, from what he had already heard,
zu Pfeiffer had evidently caught them unprepared,
wiped out a mass and secured a supernatural effect
by destroying the idol. He remembered his talk on
das Volkliches and his comment that zu Pfeiffer was
unusually well informed upon the psychology of the
native mind.</p>

<p>During two days disputing in the native manner
news came in of fresh
<corr sic="masssacres"><anchor id="E19"/><ref
target="e19">massacres</ref></corr>,
adding to the general
terror. He sent for the headman and with him held a
long shauri. The result was that the old fellow conceived
the wonderful idea, already suggested by his
lesser brethren, of enlisting the services of this white
<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>
man, reputed to be a most marvellous magician, in
their protection.</p>

<p>Then having had his wits sharpened by his own
originality and a sheath knife, the headman promptly
discovered that the ceremony of exorcism could not
be performed because the local wizard had departed
with every ounce of magic for the front. Still there
were obstinate and fearful persons who wished that
Birnier should send a message to the king and wait
until he had the permission. Another two days were
lost until this objection was overcome by certain
presents of <q>bafta,</q> destined for the king, being handed
over to the village.</p>

<p>On the week&rsquo;s march across Wongolo, Mungongo
triumphantly held spellbound audiences at every
village through which they passed. As they neared
the site of the City of the Snake, where they heard zu
Pfeiffer was encamped, they encountered deserted
villages. When they came upon the smouldering
embers of one Birnier consented to turn aside from the
regular trail in order to pass to the west of Kawa
Kendi&rsquo;s where, so the natives said, were Zalu Zako and
Bakahenzie.</p>

<p>Beyond a belt of forest was open rolling country.
They came to a village of five huts where dwelt some
herdsmen, although most of the cattle had been
driven westwards. Mungongo, seeking at Birnier&rsquo;s
suggestion for some one who had actually been present
at the village when zu Pfeiffer attacked, discovered
a young girl who had escaped. He brought the
daughter of Bakala into the presence of Moonspirit
still pathetically clutching the amulet which Marufa
had sold her. But from Bakuma, who had fled to the
<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>
forest at the first assault and afterwards to this herdsmen&rsquo;s
village where the fact of the tabu would not yet
have penetrated, Birnier could interpret little of
value. Of the whereabouts of Zalu Zako she knew
no more than the peasants. She remembered Infunyana,
as he had been called on his previous visit to
the City of the Snake, and to her it seemed that a
god had descended from the blue sky personally to
aid her. So utterly incomprehensible and terrifying
had the attack appeared that unconsciously the inevitability
of her doom was shaken; if such things could
happen, she felt rather than thought, then who could
say what else was possible? She asked permission to
travel with Moonspirit. Birnier, who knew from her
dress, or lack of it, that she was unmarried, smiled as
he wondered whether she was seeking her lover.</p>

<p>Throughout their journey they had not met a
single warrior; but as they neared the place of the
king they began to meet groups of them. At the
sight of the first headdress Bakuma bolted into the
grass, nor did she reappear until after they had gone.
Later she came to Birnier and asked permission to hide
within his tent when the warriors appeared, and to
his question began to explain the fate to which she had
been doomed. Naturally this account of the Marriage
of the Bride of the Banana at the Harvest Festival was
of value as well as of interest to Birnier, from whom
it had been concealed when in the country before.
He cross-questioned her and made notes; but Bakuma
could give him practically no details of what actually
happened, a secret well guarded by the craft.</p>

<p>They looked downcast, these warriors, and were
doubtful what to do on meeting another white.
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>
Many had never before seen a white man and were
inclined to bestow upon Moonspirit all the attributes
which they had given to Eyes-in-the-hands. Eh!
said they, Eyes-in-the-hands is a more powerful
god than the Unmentionable One, for has he not
eaten him up? Eyes-in-the-hands has imprisoned
the thunder and the lightning in a bag which he looses
at will. Who could withstand him? Had they
better not submit before his wrath had eaten them all
up? E-eh! man cannot fight with a god, as any
fool knows.</p>

<p>They were returning to their homes to make pilgrimage
to the new god, to propitiate him with oxen
and with ivory lest worse befall. However they knew
where Zalu Zako was hidden, also the wizards
whose magic was as a drop of water in a fire. Mungongo
did not fail to relate the marvels of Moonspirit
which he had seen with his own eyes, he and those
with him. The warriors listened without being in the
least impressed. That, said they, was merely woman&rsquo;s
magic to what Eyes-in-the-hands could do! Aie-e!
had not they fallen dead in masses at the cough of one
of his monster spirits! Aie-e! had not the look of
him burned up the Unmentionable One as a straw in
a fire! Therefore was he not greater than the god?
Aie-e! was he not burning their villages at will!
Aie-e, brothers, they must hasten to appease the wrath
of so terrible a god!</p>

<p>Birnier saw that it was useless to attempt to argue
with them. Zu Pfeiffer, with his shrewd stroke at the
kernel of their faith in the symbol of the idol, had
established a kind of godhead; and by his ferocious
massacres had thoroughly cowed them. However
<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>
Birnier secured one man to guide him to where Zalu
Zako, the witch-doctors and those who remained with
him, were in hiding.</p>

<p>On the fringe of the dense forest they camped. The
warrior guide went to acquaint Zalu Zako of their
approach, else otherwise the sight of a white might
provoke an attempt at massacre or flight. On the third
day the man returned bearing greetings from Zalu
Zako personally who remembered well Infunyana,
the only white man whom he had ever met.</p>

<p>For two days, on a faint trail, in a steamy heat
pulsing with chromatic birds and lizards, they journeyed
through the forest, the skirts of the vast Ituri whose
deepest recess is the home of the pygmy. One early
forenoon they were halted by the warrior in apparently
trackless jungle and bidden to camp. Mungongo was
indignant, but protest was useless as the man refused
to conduct them any farther, saying that Zalu Zako
would come to them. So the carriers cut a circle and
built a zareba and the messenger was swallowed by
the green wall bearing presents of two rifles.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD14" type="chapter">
<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 14</hi>
</head>

<p>About a mile from Birnier&rsquo;s camp, through
forest so dense that even the progress of a native
clambering from trunk to trunk and over undergrowth
ten feet deep was slow and tortuous, was the temporary
village of Zalu Zako; some six or seven hundred
huts of branches and creepers straggling over
a wide area of ground which had been roughly
cleared from undergrowth by a few slaves and
women.</p>

<p>The hut of Zalu Zako, as those of most of the bigger
chiefs and wizards, was furnished with reeds upon the
floor to avoid squatting actually in the green slime, and
boasted a palisade run from tree to tree enclosing the
huts of his two wives, women and slaves. Every
morning the leader of a long line of slaves bringing
supplies from the villages in the open, chanting softly
the song of the march, entered the village through a
mass of creepers which hung like a curtain of humid
green. Many hundreds of warriors with their chiefs
had deserted their king after the flight from Yagonyana&rsquo;s
village.</p>

<p>In the mind of Zalu Zako was doubt and perplexity
as in those of his people. All the accepted <q>laws</q>
and <q>facts</q> of his world had been set at naught;
it was as if buck lived in the rivers and fish ran roaring
through the forests. Fear, curiosity, and resentment
filled him. Sometimes it appeared that Eyes-in-the-hands
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>
had indeed proved to be a more powerful god
than the Unmentionable One, of whom he was, or
should have been, high priest and king; that he had
eaten him up as they said; so perhaps the better course
was to submit to this being invincible. Yet this very
anarchy of his beliefs had released once more the
passion for Bakuma whom he had renounced, the desire
for whom had been inhibited by the sense of the
inevitability of the mandate of the witch-doctors.
Hereditary custom, which made him feel that it was
incumbent upon him&mdash;a primitive sense of duty&mdash;to be
king-god warred with this longing for Bakuma. The
fact that he was not yet bound to celibacy quickened
the seed of rebellion against the domination of the
wizards. If he could escape the godhood then Bakuma
was alive again. For to his mind a ban upon the personal
ego was far stronger than any ban upon a second
person.</p>

<p>Chewing the cud of this sweet grass of hope squatted
Zalu Zako one morning in the dignified solitude of his
compound on the threshold of his hut. Opposite him
sat the brother conspirator of Bakahenzie, Marufa, a
brown shadow in comparison to the gleaming of the
royal insignia of the ivory bangles. They sat silent,
motionless, save for the occasional sparse movement of
snuff taking. In the steamy heat a continual mutter
and rustle persisted, punctuated by the harsh scream
of a green parrot or the squawks of a troop of monkeys.
In the faintly spattered sunlight percolating through
the bowered roof vivid lizards rivalled in colour the
rare finger of an orchid clinging to the great tree
beside the hut. Through the humid air came the
faint chant of carriers at the end of a journey; swelled
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>
louder and ceased. At the mutter of greeting near
by Marufa grunted.</p>

<p><q>The beaten dog returns to nose in the garbage,</q>
he mumbled.</p>

<p><q>Maybe he hath news of the doings,</q> commented
Zalu Zako after a pause.</p>

<p><q>The young dog starts a buck in every tree stump,</q>
returned Marufa.</p>

<p>The mumble of voices in the hut of Yabolo near to
<corr sic="Zaku"><anchor id="E20"/><ref
target="e20">Zalu</ref></corr>
Zako&rsquo;s continued. Neither Zalu Zako nor
Marufa knew other than that, after his downfall,
Sakamata had retired to his native village on the southern
boundary where the people, being laymen, had
believed the excuse for his absence given by Sakamata
that he had retired to the forest for one moon
in the guise of his totem, the wart hog, which animal
became accordingly tabu to their killing for that
period. At length came a young slave from Yabolo
who, after saluting, delivered a message from
Yabolo requesting that Zalu Zako receive him and
his relative, Sakamata, who had weighty news for
him.</p>

<p>Presently entered the recusant bearing signs of prosperity
in the flowered print about his loins, the ancient
cartridge pouch slung around his waist and a huge
revolver of the pin-fire model dangling from a neck
which appeared more tortoise-like than ever. Before
Zalu Zako he squatted and after they had exchanged
the usual hostages to hostility, Sakamata inquired
most politely after the health of the Son-of-the-Snake,
of his cattle and of his fortune, and last of all of his
women. Sakamata, aware of the loss of prestige
suffered by his old enemy, Bakahenzie, presented
<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>
<corr sic="Zaku"><anchor id="E21"/><ref
target="e21">Zalu</ref></corr>
Zako with a duplicate of the pin-fire revolver.
Followed an equally extensive greeting to Marufa.
Only when these ceremonies had been punctiliously
performed did they begin to discuss the
news.</p>

<p>At first Sakamata proceeded to repeat the popular
saying regarding the doings of Eyes-in-the-hands.
Various chiefs had visited the fort of the white man
bringing presents in their hands, terrified of what
might happen, yet, according to Sakamata, their fears
had been dispelled immediately; for the wise new
god had received them as brothers and had made
offerings to them as was the custom for strangers
to do. It was true, he admitted in cross-examination,
that whole villages had been put to the sword
and burned; but, he demanded, was not that the
way of a mighty warrior to those who resisted
him?</p>

<p>Moreover, continued Sakamata, to fight him was
death. His magic was such that no man could
prevail against him. Had any doctor yet succeeded
in making successful magic against the Invincible
One? His magic was terrible to behold.
Spirits which were imprisoned in houses of
trees (boxes) spoke and sang according to their
tribe.</p>

<p><q>Clk!</q> commented Zalu Zako incredulously.</p>

<p><q>These words are as the wind in the trees at
night speaking to girls,</q> commented Marufa slowly.
<q>What man hath beheld those things with his own
eyes?</q></p>

<p>Deliberately Sakamata tapped snuff, inhaled it
with relish, meticulously, that not one grain was
<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>
lost upon his white caterpillar moustache, and said
indifferently:</p>

<p><q>Even he who sits before you.</q></p>

<p><q>Eh!</q></p>

<p>Another point was scored. But both Zalu Zako
and Marufa regarded him as one who, having had
dealings with the devil and yet had emerged safely,
was to be suspected of some ghastly pact. After a
calculated pause Sakamata continued nonchalantly:</p>

<p><q>There is no magic like unto Eyes-in-the-hands, the
Mighty One. A great fort hath he made upon the hill
of thy grandfather (MFunya MPopo), O Zalu Zako,
girded with a great palisade, around which walk ever
<corr sic="the"><anchor id="E22"/><ref
target="e22">the</ref></corr>
red devils in uniform, each one of whom hath a gun
with seven voices. And peering through that palisade,
like a terrible black leopard from his lair, are the monster
coughing devils. Eh! who are they who can
withstand them?</q></p>

<p><q>Eh!</q> echoed his audience with lively memories
of the <q>coughing devils.</q></p>

<p><q>And he hath a mighty hut made from the white
man&rsquo;s cloth of colour like to the forest full of things to
make magic. Seated upon his chair like unto a man
plucking bananas, the eyes upon his hands and in his
head gleam so fiercely that water is made within a
man. He who dares to look sees not only Eyes-in-the-hands,
but his two souls, even as thou seest thine own
two souls staring at thee with the frightened eyes that
are thine!</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q></p>

<p>This time a genuine belly grunt was elicited, and
even Marufa moved uneasily.</p>

<p><q>Thou hast been bewitched,</q> he added to mask his
<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>
astonishment. <q>For a man may see his own soul in
any pool, but never two souls!</q></p>

<p><q>Even is it as I have told thee, O son of MTungo,</q>
asserted Sakamata.</p>

<p>Sakamata discovered the use of snuff again to be
necessary. He watched covertly the repressed excitement
in the eyes of Zalu Zako.</p>

<p><q>And what said the great magician unto thee?</q>
Marufa demanded to cover his discomfort.</p>

<p><q>He spoke white words as a warrior should,</q> said
Sakamata. <q>He gave words which told me that he was
but a small wizard. He made my eyes to see the soul
of a greater god than he, who was there and yet was
not there; for at the touch of his magic hand with
many eyes, behold! there were two more souls of the
god which returned even as I looked.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh! A greater god than he?</q> demanded
Zalu Zako, with a flicker of the white of his
eyes.</p>

<p><q>Even as I have said, a greater god who is king of
all the white man&rsquo;s countries in the sea, who eats up
those whom he pleases. Yet, even though he may
bewitch with one of his eyes, did he speak softly to
Yagombi, the son of Bagazaan, and Zalayan, the son
of Kilmanyana, who were with me, bidding us to
tell our brethren that if they would not acknowledge
the true king that then he would eat us up, even as
he ate up the Unmentionable One. But to those who
would submit and make due tribute, would he protect
in peace from the white men who, fleeing from the
wrath of the great god, would soon come to eat up
our country like the locusts.</q></p>

<p><q>Eh! ehh! white men as the locusts!</q></p>
<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>

<p><q>Thus he spoke and bade us to go forth and tell
our brethren.</q></p>

<p>This was a wholly new notion and proportionally
serious if true. But Marufa, recovering from the
first shock, wrapped himself in his professional cloak
of omniscient indifference as he recollected that
Sakamata was an unfrocked priest of the craft. The
group took snuff sternly until Sakamata, having accomplished
his mission, deemed it wise to retire to allow
the suggestive ideas to germinate. So gravely he arose
and departed from the hut of Zalu Zako and went
under the patronage of Yabolo to another compound
where, to a group of the most disaffected chiefs, including
MYalu, he repeated nearly word for word
the same harangue.</p>

<p>In the minds of 
<corr sic="Zako Zalu"><anchor id="E23"/><ref
target="e23">Zalu Zako</ref></corr>
and Marufa the report
of Sakamata had been exceedingly disquieting. Marufa
began to wonder whether he had not better make terms
with the new god before worse came to the worst in the
form of white men like locusts, a menace fraught with
dire possibilities which were based upon the rumours
which every native had heard of the ways of white men
in bulk: to the Wongolo merely vague stories from the
north of the conquest of the Sudan by the British.
Marufa&rsquo;s ambitions in the craft were almost submerged
in the dread that, wizard though he was, he would
have small chance of distinction and power among a
race of wizards. To Zalu Zako, although the prospect
of unlimited white men swooping upon them was
terrifying, his semi-conscious mind was rather occupied
with Bakuma than with affairs of state which seemed
merely to exist to torment lovers. However he, too,
was sufficiently impressed to consider seriously the
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>
advisability of submitting before it was too late; the
motivating principle of the scheme was an idea which
suggested that, in some indefinable way, such action
might lead to the avoidance of the ban of godhood
and thus to the reinstatement of Bakuma in the realm
of possibilities.</p>

<p>To Bakahenzie the report was more alarming than
to the others, inasmuch as it appeared to portend the
irretrievable loss of his power. He saw the effect
upon their minds, the inclination to yield to the new
conqueror, which, of course, would mean the last
of his followers being swept away in the crowd like
dry leaves in the wind. But more than the others he
suspected the motives of Sakamata, the man whom he
had unfrocked. Arguing in terms of his own mental
processes he saw correctly enough that Sakamata was
surely playing for himself, and guessed equally truly
that Sakamata would get, or imagined that he would
get, many rewards, political as well as in kind, for his
services as jackal to the white man. But he listened
and said no word for, or against, him. He was astute
enough never to make a move until he had, or thought
that he had, all the moves of the game worked out.
Marufa was just as wily; he related the news given
by Sakamata in a voice which gave no hint by tone or
word what any of his opinions might be. Then, as
they sat like graven images, supremely indifferent to
the doings of Sakamata or aught else, entered the
warrior bearing greetings from Birnier to Zalu
Zako.</p>

<p>Immediately Zalu Zako, to whose less skilled mind
in intrigue this succession of world-shaking events
was bewildering, feared that already the plague of
<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>
white men like locusts had commenced. But when he
learned that the white man was alone and was Infunyana,
the only white man whom he had ever met,
he perceived vaguely some remote prospect of achieving
his desires. Almost eagerly, for a native, he commanded
the messenger to summon the white man to
his presence.</p>

<p>To Bakahenzie the unexpected arrival of another
white was an unforeseen potentiality of force which
might be utilized to his own benefit; so thought
Marufa, which was in effect exactly the same reaction
as Zalu Zako&rsquo;s. Therefore Bakahenzie immediately
protested upon the ground that no stranger could
be allowed to approach the Son-of-the-Snake, or
even the village, who had not been purified according
to custom. When Zalu Zako demurred he
retorted:</p>

<p><q>Hath not one white man who was permitted to
enter our country without the demon being exorcised
wreaked disaster upon us? Wouldst thou then
destroy us utterly?</q></p>

<p>Zalu Zako was silent. Much as he would have
desired to browbeat Bakahenzie, much as his confidence
in the powers of the chief witch-doctor had waned in
his estimation, yet there remained sufficient to overawe
him when the matter was put to a crucial test.
Bakahenzie would, so he stated, go himself to see the
new white man, thus unselfishly taking upon his person
the whole risk of the lasting magic of a stranger
unpurified. But Marufa had no intention of allowing
Bakahenzie to obtain a monopoly of this possible new
ally. Unlike Zalu Zako he was not burdened with
awe and had confidence in his own magic to overcome
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>
any evil that Bakahenzie might seek to work against
him. So when he announced that he would accompany
Bakahenzie, that distressed wizard was too conscious
of his dwindling prestige to object.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD15" type="chapter">
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 15</hi>
</head>

<p>Just after sun-up next morning as Birnier was
seated at the door of his tent reading his
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Melancholy</hi>
and drinking his coffee, a startled <q>clk</q> caused
him to glance round. He saw Bakuma rise suddenly
from the fire and disappear. The next moment
materialized out of the miasma of the morning the
figures of Bakahenzie and Marufa, followed by a file
of warriors.</p>

<p>Portentously Bakahenzie stalked to the fire and
squatted down without even a murmur to Mungongo
busy with the breakfast. Bakahenzie remembered
Infunyana very well, but nevertheless designedly
Birnier ignored him in return. So they sat, the two
wizards taking snuff with grave concern almost at the
feet of the white who continued to smoke and to
read.</p>

<p>The sign boded ill, for the insistence upon the
punctilious etiquette inferred that Bakahenzie was
disposed to be suspicious, if not directly hostile. And
indeed the warriors&rsquo; description of the magic of
Moonspirit, vide Mungongo, had made Bakahenzie
uneasy.</p>

<p>After a full half-hour Bakahenzie, as if beaten in this
solemn game, turned gravely and saluted the white.
Birnier looked down from his chair with the affectation
of just having noticed that some one was there. After
a pause he returned the greeting, a little point which
<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>
Bakahenzie thoroughly appreciated. Birnier had
learned that according to Mungongo and the warrior,
Zalu Zako had not yet been anointed king-god; therefore
that Bakahenzie evidently intended to keep the
young man in the background.</p>

<p>After preliminaries, Birnier inquired after Zalu Zako
and informed Bakahenzie that he had journeyed expressly
to see him. Bakahenzie ignored the question
and began to talk about Eyes-in-the-hands, demanding
to know whether Birnier was his brother.</p>

<p><q>Nay,</q> said Birnier, <q>Eyes-in-the-hands is not of
the same tribe as Moonspirit,</q> for he sedulously followed
up the title which Mungongo had given him.
<q>Eyes-in-the-hands comes from a country twelve
moons distant from my country.</q></p>

<p>Marufa squatting beside him grunted; Bakahenzie
took snuff nonchalantly as if he did not believe a
word.</p>

<p><q>Eyes-in-the-hands is a mighty magician in his
own country,</q> said Bakahenzie in the form of an
assertion.</p>

<p><q>The magic of Eyes-in-the-hands to the magic of
Moonspirit,</q> stated Birnier, <q>is as water to the beer of
the banana.</q></p>

<p><q>Eyes-in-the-hands,</q> remarked Bakahenzie indifferently,
<q>hath magic to make the souls of man to be
seen by all.</q></p>

<p><q>Those are but the souls of the belly and body, but
Moonspirit can enchant so that the spirit of the head
of man be seen at night,</q> boasted Birnier, wondering
what trick of zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s had produced the
effect.</p>

<p><q>Eyes-in-the-hands,</q> insisted Bakahenzie, <q>hath
<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>
a spirit in a piece of a tree which cries or laughs, sings
or talks to his magic.</q></p>

<p><q>Moonspirit,</q> retorted Birnier (thinking <q>Gramophone,
but I can go one better, my friend</q>), <q>hath
also a spirit in a piece of tree who will speak words
of wisdom unto thee in thine own tongue, who will
repeat that which is said unto him in thy tongue or
in my tongue, who will speak words of wisdom even
unto thee.</q></p>

<p>Bakahenzie seemed outmatched in the boasting
tournament. He tapped snuff woodenly. Marufa
scratched his skinny ribs thoughtfully. Then Bakahenzie
remarked:</p>

<p><q>He that hath not been cleansed may not look
upon the Son-of-the-Snake.</q></p>

<p><q>He that hath not been anointed need have no
fear of the evil eye.</q></p>

<p><q>Hath not one who was not cleansed entered
and cast evil upon the tribe?</q> demanded Bakahenzie.</p>

<p><q>If the fence is not strong the leopard will
enter.</q></p>

<p><q>If the leopard be not strong and swift indeed
may he not be killed in the hut?</q> inquired Bakahenzie.</p>

<p><q>If a leopard and a wild-cat break in, then wilt thou
not kill the leopard first?</q></p>

<p><q>Even so,</q> retorted Bakahenzie; <q>then is
water stronger than beer, even as the beer does
reveal?</q></p>

<p>Birnier nearly smiled in recognition of the hit.</p>

<p><q>Nay, does not beer make the fool to talk foolishness?
Dost thou then cast away the banana? Does not one
<pb n="165"/><anchor id="Pg165"/>
talk foolishness also who is sick and yet discardeth
good medicine, because he feareth to poison his
belly?</q></p>

<p><q>Even so,</q> said Bakahenzie obstinately, <q>does the
sick man exorcise the good medicine lest an enemy hath
made magic thereupon?</q></p>

<p><q>Then,</q> said Birnier, whose only objection to the
ceremony was the delay and the messiness, <q>let the
good medicine be purified.</q></p>

<p>Bakahenzie grunted and covertly took stock of the
tent and equipment visible. Upon the pile of cases
stacked just inside the tent his eyes rested some time,
but he would not make any inquiry. Marufa, too,
was occupied in the same manner. Bakahenzie was
recalling the previous meeting with Birnier in the village
of MFunya <corr sic="MPope"><anchor id="E24"/><ref
target="e24">MPopo</ref></corr>&mdash;of that day when Birnier had
not made any attempt to impress the native mind
with <q>magic</q> other than the ordinary <q>miracles</q> in
the routine of a white man&rsquo;s life.</p>

<p><q>When the Son-of-the-Snake,</q> inquired Birnier,
who had learned as much of the hagiocracy as
Mungongo knew, <q>hath taken up the Burden,
wilt thou then drive Eyes-in-the-hands from the
country?</q></p>

<p>Bakahenzie slowly withdrew his eyes from the
fascinating case as far as Birnier&rsquo;s booted foot.</p>

<p><q>Hast thou, white man, the magic twig that makes
fire?</q> he demanded.</p>

<p><q>Even so.</q></p>

<p>Birnier took a box of matches from his pocket and
struck one. Bakahenzie and Marufa watched him
solemnly. Then a lean bronze hand was outstretched.
Birnier gave him the box. Slowly and gravely Bakahenzie,
<pb n="166"/><anchor id="Pg166"/>
the chief witch-doctor, extracted a match,
turned it over and over, smelt it, tasted it, regarded
it, and struck it on the top of the box. It was a safety
match, so nothing happened. Birnier, without a
vestige of a smile, instructed him to strike it only upon
the black piece at the side. That impressed Bakahenzie
and Marufa. The former tried again as directed
and succeeded. Holding the match too near the head
he burned the quick of the nail, but not a muscle
quivered. He would not even admit that the white
man&rsquo;s devil stick had bitten him. But he was still
more impressed.</p>

<p>At a sign from Birnier, Mungongo brought from the
tent a nickel-plated revolver and cartridges, which he
placed at the feet of Bakahenzie without comment.
Apparently Bakahenzie did not notice the action or the
gift. He held out the matches to return to the white
man. Birnier requested him to keep them. He
wrapped up the box in his loin-cloth and fell to
further contemplation of the cases. He was cogitating.
The value of this white had suddenly increased.
Evidently he could make small magic. Perhaps he
could make as much big magic as Eyes-in-the-hands.
Who knew? But then if that was so he could make
greater magic than he, Bakahenzie, could. Bakahenzie
saw that if Moonspirit were such a great magician he
would be difficult or impossible to control. Naturally
Bakahenzie could only understand his own
motives in others. His problem now was to discover
some means by which he could control Moonspirit,
make of him a familiar to work to his own ends. Why
was he so insistent upon seeing Zalu Zako? Bakahenzie
became more and more suspicious. He saw
<pb n="167"/><anchor id="Pg167"/>
another reason why the white man must be kept away
from Zalu Zako. To refuse to purify him would give
a valid excuse that he may not look upon the Son-of-the-Snake.
But he did not wish to displease him; also
Marufa could perform the purification.</p>

<p>Again Birnier repeated the question regarding the
overthrow of Eyes-in-the-hands. Bakahenzie took
snuff, regarded the revolver lying at his feet idly, and
deigned to reply.</p>

<p><q>When that which must be hath come to pass, then
shall the children of the Snake eat up their enemies as
a lizard eats flies.</q></p>

<p><q>And what is that which must come to pass?</q></p>

<p>Bakahenzie sat silent awhile, slightly shocked at the
directness of the question; then as if to humour the
white man, he replied:</p>

<p><q>When the Bridegroom hath taken the Bride.</q></p>

<p>The ceremony of purification could not take place
until the following day, because such things may not
be hurried; and moreover, various potent charms had
to be sent for to the native village. Meanwhile
Bakahenzie squatted by the fire, contemplating the
nickel-plated revolver and affairs of policy, and opposite
him sat the meditative Marufa.</p>

<p>From the hour of the monkey, Bakahenzie, unconscious
of the small face and anxious eyes watching the
camp from the tangle of green, was busy muttering
spells over a calabash containing a magic concoction
composed of the entrails of a white goat, certain herbs
and the eyes of a black wild-cat. When the roof of
the forest was a patterned ceiling against an incandescent
glow, Birnier stripped to the waist, and
submitted himself to the hands of the wizard who,
<pb n="168"/><anchor id="Pg168"/>
after scattering the feathers of a scarlet parrot into the
calabash, smeared the left breast, the forehead and the
right arm of the white man, to the accompaniment of
an incantation. These insignia and specifics he must
not remove for three suns; nor could he be permitted
to look upon the semi-divine Zalu Zako until
whatever evil influence his foreign body might
possess should have been exorcised by this powerful
medicine.</p>

<p>To sit around half nude in such heat was no arduous
undertaking, but to sleep without rubbing off the
concoction was another matter; also the odour
thereof was not pleasing to the nostrils of a white man.
But Birnier accomplished the feat by smoking excessively
and by marking with a pencil the various
nostrums recommended by the amiable Burton, many
of which were hardly less disagreeable than Doctor
Bakahenzie&rsquo;s prescription.</p>

<p>That worthy&rsquo;s slaves had erected a hut for him nigh
to the tent in the door of which he squatted, usually
with Marufa beside him, throughout the day, with
ever a contemplative eye upon his victim, an eye which
Birnier was sure was eagerly seeking some excuse to
plead that he had inadvertently rendered the magic
impotent, and must accordingly have the ceremony
repeated.</p>

<p>Amused by the ridiculous sight he presented,
plastered over with this filth, Birnier made Mungongo,
whom he had taught to operate a camera, take a photograph
of him, which would entertain Lucille, as well
as be of scientific interest. Bakahenzie and Marufa
watched this performance from the fire with amazement,
for they imagined that the camera was some kind of
<pb n="169"/><anchor id="Pg169"/>
gun. When they heard the click, they grunted as if
expecting the white man to fall dead. Birnier of
course knew the universal native belief in the picture
being the soul, or one of the souls. He summoned
Bakahenzie and Marufa and showed them a photograph
which, after some difficulty, they recognised as
Mungongo.</p>

<p><q>Eh,</q> grunted a warrior, <q>indeed is Mungongo the
slave of the white man, for hath he not imprisoned
his soul?</q></p>

<p>Mungongo laughed, yet he believed in the superstition
as implicitly as any of his compatriots, for said
he:</p>

<p><q>It is a wise man who hath that which is his always
within his hand, even as Moonspirit hath the soul of
his favourite wife with him always, so that she may
not be unfaithful unto him.</q></p>

<p><q>Eh, he is wiser than the Banana Eater!</q> grunted
the warrior in admiration.</p>

<p>Birnier&rsquo;s training to control his features was strained
in the effort not to express surprise. He could not
imagine from what Mungongo had derived this
astonishing statement, until he recollected that the
boy had seen a photograph of Lucille among his
papers.</p>

<p>After this successful demonstration of his sophistication,
Mungongo was anxious that Moonspirit give an
exhibition of his magic to dumbfound the chief witch-doctor,
desiring most ardently to work the gramophone,
to operate which he had also learned. But on reflection,
Birnier decided that it was not his policy
<corr sic="tomake"><anchor id="E25"/><ref
target="e25">to make</ref></corr>
his thunder too cheap.</p>

<p>Each evening as the last subtle violet quivered in the
<pb n="170"/><anchor id="Pg170"/>
trees had Bakuma glided from the shelter of the undergrowth
under the flap of Birnier&rsquo;s tent, where she had
lain until the first tint of dawn on the foliage of
the forest. Birnier had wished her to leave for
some village until Bakahenzie had left the camp,
but Bakuma had frantically pleaded to remain,
knowing that the craft was seeking her throughout the
country since Bakahenzie&rsquo;s latest interview with mighty
Tarum.</p>

<p>But upon the third day as Birnier was seated reading
philosophically at his tent door, the inevitable happened.
A loud outcry arose and from the tangle of creepers
started the lithe figure of Bakuma, who darted past
him into the tent. For a moment there was silence.
But Birnier guessed what the matter was. Bakahenzie
emerged from the wall of green and cried out in a
loud voice. Instantly the warriors around leaped to
their feet, and broke out into great clamour.</p>

<p>Mungongo, busy with the cooking pots, rushed
to Birnier&rsquo;s side, gesticulating wildly. Inside the tent
crouched Bakuma. Towards Birnier advanced Bakahenzie
and the warriors, whose dilated eyes and spears
in their hands betokened that Bakahenzie had stirred
their deepest feelings of terror and murder. Birnier
smoked placidly, neither stirring nor permitting a sign
of their presence to cross his features.</p>

<p>Mungongo, startled out of his confidence in Moonspirit,
excitedly bade Bakuma go forth as Bakahenzie,
stopping in front of the white man, broke into a
harangue, bidding him to give up Bakuma whose
sacrilege in breaking the magic circle, as he had said,
had brought the terrible Eyes-in-the-hands upon
them; that the welfare of the tribe depended upon
<pb n="171"/><anchor id="Pg171"/>
her sacrifice to the angered Unmentionable One even
as she had been doomed; and threatening that they
would take the insolent white man, whose magic was
as water, and sacrifice him as well, as was desired by
the spirit of Tarum.</p>

<p>The longer he spoke the more excited he grew.
Motivated by the sudden conviction that the sacrifice
of Bakuma, whose action he had foretold so successfully,
and the slaughter of the white would really restore to
him his repute and remove at the same time the
problem of controlling a superior magician who
threatened to become his rival, Bakahenzie began to
work himself up into the necessary state of prophetic
hysteria. Cowering against the camp-bed Bakuma
whimpered with terror; Mungongo incoherently
begged Moonspirit to give up the girl.</p>

<p>Not a muscle moved upon Birnier&rsquo;s face; nor even
did his eyes turn in the direction of the menacing
crowd who with uplifted spears joggled each other
around Bakahenzie. Birnier knew that it was a supreme
test of nerve; knew that any attempt to snatch a
rifle or a movement of any sort, would precipitate action
on their side. He had no intention of surrendering
the girl to a hideous fate, and also he saw beyond the
incident that if Bakahenzie were to triumph over him
now, not only would his prestige with the natives be
gone for ever, but that his fate would be surely sealed.
Slowly, exaggeratedly, as if he were alone, he killed a
mosquito upon his bare right breast and lighted his pipe
anew.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie advanced a step followed by the warriors.
His voice had reached the falsetto timbre. Mungongo
lost his head entirely and seizing Bakuma, began to
<pb n="172"/><anchor id="Pg172"/>
drag her out of the tent. Birnier turned his head
leisurely towards him. Said he very loudly:</p>

<p><q>It is not seemly to rape a woman in my presence,
O Mungongo. Let her be, for I will buy thee
one.</q></p>

<p>Mungongo ceased to pull at Bakuma&rsquo;s arms and stared
as if paralysed. Birnier saw the eyes switch in a
terrified glance at the warriors behind him and heard
Bakahenzie&rsquo;s yell to kill.</p>

<p>For one moment he thought that indeed the end had
come. Before he could reach the rifle a dozen spears
would be in his back. He sat motionless, the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Anatomy
of Melancholy</hi> still in his hand, and watched the gauge of
Mungongo&rsquo;s eyes. Bakahenzie&rsquo;s voice rose to a screech.
Suddenly Birnier wheeled round in his chair, snatched
up the pencil and staring hard at them, began to sketch
faces on the open page of the book.</p>

<p>At the sight the warriors ceased their shuffling dance,
were arrested with the spears in their hands in as many
poses. Bakahenzie&rsquo;s scream was stoppered as if by a
hand upon his mouth. In the silence their heavy
breathing rivalled the twitter and hum of the forest.
Birnier sketched furiously, glaring portentously from
the group to the paper. Bakahenzie took a step forward,
a nervous step, and yelled, <q>Kill!</q> but
his voice released those of the warriors. In one
loud shout they cried:</p>

<p><q>He bewitches us! He bewitches us!</q></p>

<p>As Birnier bent his head to make another magic
mark upon the magic book he heard the rush of
feet.</p>

<p><q>They have fled!</q> squealed Mungongo, still
clutching Bakuma.</p>
<pb n="173"/><anchor id="Pg173"/>

<p>Birnier sighed and dropped his pencil as he glanced
up. Bakahenzie and the warriors had disappeared,
but by the fire squatted Marufa unconcernedly
scratching his skinny ribs.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD16" type="chapter">
<pb n="174"/><anchor id="Pg174"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 16</hi>
</head>

<p>Changed was the City of the Snake, the place
of kings. Upon the site where had been the
hive of huts wrapped in the green arms of the banana
plantation, laboured under the incandescent sun
gangs of prisoners under armed guards upon the
building of larger huts laid out in streets, broad and
geometrical, lined with correct ditches for drainage.
Around the outskirts here and there remained charred
posts.</p>

<p>Upon the hill of MKoffo was a palisade enclosing
the barracks of two companies of the askaris and two
guns. No brown cones peeped like candle-snuffers
above the sea of green fronds upon the hills of the
tombs of kings, but from the sacred hill of Kawa Kendi
commanding the approach to the valley rose, black
against the sky, the triangle of the roof frame of a
large bungalow; around the crown of the hill was
a stout palisade through which grinned in the sun
the muzzles of a Nordenfeldt and a pom-pom; and
outside upon a levee strutted rigidly four sentries
night and day, a perpetual reminder to the passer-by
below of efficient vigilance.</p>

<p>Within was a methodical formation of round huts
dominated by a square one; at the far end, and in
solitary grandeur beneath the Imperial flag upon a
roughly-hewn flag-pole, was a green marquee tent,
the temporary quarters of the Kommandant.</p>
<pb n="175"/><anchor id="Pg175"/>

<p>Under the tent verandah at the rear where were
his private quarters sat zu Pfeiffer with a towel tucked
around his neck upon which was scattered inch-lengths
of hair. Sergeant Schultz sheared deftly
with clippers like a reaper in a field of corn. When
he had completed the final trimming behind the
ears, he stood aside with the air of an artist viewing
his work.</p>

<p><q>Is that pleasing to your Excellence?</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer ran a hand around his skull.</p>

<p><q>Ya, that is better and cooler, sergeant.</q></p>

<p>With a professional air Schultz whisked around the
Kommandant&rsquo;s neck with a light brush, untucked the
towel and brushed him down. As zu Pfeiffer rose
Bakunjala appeared with a broom of small branches
and a pan and proceeded to sweep the earthen floor.
Schultz neatly folded up the towel, placed it on the
chair, and stood at attention.</p>

<p><q>Is that all, Excellence?</q></p>

<p><q>Ya, sergeant. Take a cigar.</q></p>

<p><q>Thank you, Excellence!</q></p>

<p>The sergeant selected one, saluted and departed.
Zu Pfeiffer lounged in a basket chair. The usual
water bag and syphon were suspended at his elbow
above sparklet and brandy bottles, and a box of cigars.
Around him on the floor was a litter of papers, envelopes
and documents. On his wrist sparkled the
jewelled bracelet and between fingers, one of which
bore the large diamond which had earned him his
native name, was an official document bearing the
Imperial Eagles.</p>

<p>As he read he smiled and patted his left moustache
approvingly. Officially the authorities would not
<pb n="176"/><anchor id="Pg176"/>
comply with his request made before leaving Ingonya
for two more companies of askaris with white non-commissioned
officers and two more guns; but unofficially
he was informed that they would be supplied
later and that the authorities were pleased. He
picked up a private letter and re-read it. Then he
smiled again, a sneering twist remaining at the corner
of the mouth. Always he was informed by sympathetic
friends and an agency of the whereabouts and doings
of Lucille. On the 1st of August she had been due
at Wiesbaden.</p>

<p>He threw the letter on the table with an irritable
gesture and scowled as he drank. The arrival of the
mail always brought vivid regrets for the glories and
comforts he was missing by being condemned to war
with <q>dirty swines of niggers.</q> That was part of the
penalty he had had to pay for being a gentleman in
a land of dollar grubbers, yet a matter to be written
up against the account of Lucille, the entz&uuml;ckend
Lucille. He must have been verr&uuml;ckt, he reflected
savagely. The delicate lips softened in ludicrous
contrast to the brutal outline of a cropped skull.
The blare of a trumpet disturbed his reveries, reveries
which were apt to rankle until among his satellites
went the word that the Eater-of-men was possessed
by the demon once more.</p>

<p>After he had elegantly finished a small cup of caf&eacute;
cognac and a cigarette, Sergeant Schultz strutted up,
saluted, and at a nod from zu Pfeiffer handed a
document to the Kommandant, a roster of the chiefs
who had submitted with the approximate number of
their followers. Officially there were five chiefs with
some six thousand men who had nominally accepted
<pb n="177"/><anchor id="Pg177"/>
the new ruler, each one of whom had to leave as
hostage for his fidelity a son, who lived under guard
in the village beneath the guns.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer needed the extra companies and white
men to establish stations at various points with the
object of gradually extending the sphere of military
occupation. Zu Pfeiffer left nothing, as far as he
could foresee, to chance; his maxim was to conserve
his force to the utmost, to attain his objective at
the least possible cost in men and material. The
policy of terrorisation was based on the reasoning that
eventually schrecklichkeit saved both the conqueror
and the conquered bloodshed and trouble; for if
the enemy were not so impressed with the fact that
all resistance was utterly useless, he would resort to
the sporadic risings which would entail more slaughter
on both sides. Zu Pfeiffer, acting on the teachings
of the German masters, sought to make war psychologically
as well as militarily, economically as well as
geographically. Hence his dramatic step in the
overthrow of the idol in person, and the care with
which he planned to impress each chief and native
with his omnipotence and magic. This system of
the application of political science as well as of military
science, of course, was sound, save for a temperamental
error: the lack of sufficient imagination to realize
the unknown quantity of chance, the inevitable mistake
of military scientists who are loath to admit the artist
to their counsels, exemplified by men of genius, such
as Napoleon and Leonardo da Vinci, who were both
mathematicians and artists.</p>

<p>In zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s case, as in others of his type, the
motivating principle was not bourgeois greed of material
<pb n="178"/><anchor id="Pg178"/>
gain for himself; gain he could afford to despise in
his wealth; such would have been contrary to the
code of a gentleman. While he had not hesitated
for a moment to destroy his rival, Birnier, he would
not touch with one finger any of his goods; for that
reason had he given permission to the corporal to
take Birnier&rsquo;s equipment, so that he would not even
be contaminated by the possession of them, a temperamental
error again which had led to Birnier&rsquo;s
escape.</p>

<p>The driving power in his caste and tribe was love
of power to an excess masked with portentous solemnity
under the cloak of benefiting this people and the
peoples of the world; forcing them to have broad
streets and sanitary arrangements, compelling them to
laugh, to sing, and to be happy whether they would
or no: an urge which is the curse of the world, the
impulse to interfere in other folk&rsquo;s affairs, to teach
them, to make them to know the true God, the
right way of living, the right way of doing everything
from the rising of the first sun of consciousness
to that happy crack of doom when our
planet tries to enforce its orbit upon some other
planet.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer pinched a cigar tip, lighted it meticulously
and considered the roster.</p>

<p><q>Sergeant, this man&mdash;what&rsquo;s the animal&rsquo;s name?
Kalomato&mdash;has his son surrendered himself?</q></p>

<p><q>No, Excellence. The man says that he has fled
the country.</q></p>

<p><q>Where does he come from?</q></p>

<p><q>The neighbourhood, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>That means that his son is with the rebels?</q></p>
<pb n="179"/><anchor id="Pg179"/>

<p><q>Probably not, Excellence. He is very young,
they say.</q></p>

<p><q>That does not matter. Sequester all the chief&rsquo;s
property. If he won&rsquo;t give it up let the askaris deal
with him. If that doesn&rsquo;t work, have him shot.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p>For such obstinate cases zu Pfeiffer had fallen upon
the custom of serving two purposes by handing over
the victim to the mercies of his askaris which whetted
their sadistic appetites and usually secured the desired
revelation of the whereabouts of the hidden ivory or
other goods under the torture of the burning feet,
and divers other ingenious methods. Of late this
practice had proved so satisfactory that the mere
threat was usually sufficient.</p>

<p><q>This man,</q> continued zu Pfeiffer tapping the
roster with his long nail, <q>his son is here?</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Has he paid the tithe due?</q></p>

<p><q>No, Excellence. He refuses.</q></p>

<p><q>Have the son shot.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p><q>Any report this morning?</q></p>

<p><q>Ja, Excellence. A Wamungo spy brings news
that a white man entered the country from the
south.</q></p>

<p><q>Description?</q></p>

<p><q>They say he is a trader, Excellence, coming from
the Kivu direction, but the savage cannot give any
satisfactory description. It is the first white he has
seen, he says.</q></p>

<p><q>He won&rsquo;t be the last!</q> snapped zu Pfeiffer with
a twitch of the left sentry moustache. <q>Saunders,
<pb n="180"/><anchor id="Pg180"/>
possibly. If so he should be here shortly to report.
Well?</q></p>

<p><q>The King and the few men left with him are in
hiding, Excellence, in dense forest. They are demoralized
and quarrel among themselves. Many are
coming to surrender, for they say that you, Excellence,
have eaten their god.</q></p>

<p><q>Ach!</q> said zu Pfeiffer with satisfaction. <q>What
did I tell you, sergeant?</q></p>

<p><q>Your Excellence was correct in every respect.</q></p>

<p><q>Um! Pity I can&rsquo;t spare a company. That would
settle them before they have a chance to reorganize.
Ach, but they haven&rsquo;t the sense, the animals, to do
that.&hellip; Parade, sergeant.</q></p>

<p>Schultz saluted.</p>

<p><q>Ready, Excellence.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer rose, took up his gold-mounted sjambok,
and the two walked around the big marquee to the
front where between the orderly lines of huts those
askaris not on duty were drawn up for inspection.
The sergeant barked. Bayonets flashed as they
presented arms. Another bark and they ported
arms. Zu Pfeiffer walked down the line inspecting
buttons, bolts, and rifles as meticulously as he had
lighted his cigar. The fifteenth barrel he thrust
away petulantly and flicked the askari&rsquo;s face with his
sjambok. The muscles of the man&rsquo;s face twitched as
the blow came and the eyes bulged, but he did not
flinch.</p>

<p><q>Twenty-five, sergeant!</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer passed on. When the inspection was
finished he stood rigidly smoking, coldly watching
<pb n="181"/><anchor id="Pg181"/>
Schultz dismiss the men. Then he stalked down the
hill with Schultz slightly in the rear, followed by a
big black Munyamwezi sergeant-major, towards the
opposite hill, of MKoffo. But at the bottom of where
there were some half-constructed huts he paused.</p>

<p><q>The women, sergeant?</q></p>

<p><q>The large hut, Excellence. Two hundred as
ordered.</q></p>

<p><q>No women of chiefs?</q></p>

<p><q>No, Excellence. Those attending on the hostages
are housed apart.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer strode towards the hut indicated which
stood near to the edge of a rased banana plantation.
Two sentries without the fence presented
arms stiffly and remained immobile. Within the
compound were some sixty or more young girls,
mostly having the black complexion of the slave type.
The chattering and giggling ceased as the tall form
of the dreaded Eyes-in-the-hands stood in the gate.
A slight smile flirted his lips.</p>

<p>From the deep violet of the hut interior
darted a young girl into the sunlight. At the sight
of the white men she poised on her toes, one foot
forward and hands extended as if about to whirl into
a dance, staring with the curiosity of a fawn.</p>

<p>Tall for a native maid, the light bronze of her
immature breasts revealed that she was of the Wongolo
ruling caste. Around her slender neck was a circlet
of bright blue beads. As zu Pfeiffer stiffened and
stared she wheeled and fled into the hut.</p>

<p><q>Gott im Himmel!</q> he muttered. <q>The body
of Lucille in Carmen!</q></p>

<p><q>Who is that woman?</q> he demanded of Schultz.</p>
<pb n="182"/><anchor id="Pg182"/>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know, Excellence,</q> replied the sergeant
and spoke to the black sergeant-major. <q>She is the
daughter of the chief Bamana, Excellence, visiting
these other women. I will have her removed.</q></p>

<p><q>I will not have the sense of caste abused,</q> said
zu Pfeiffer, gazing into the hut. <q>That is not policy.
Have her sent to the fort, sergeant, and placed under
guard.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer swung on his heels and strode out and
up the hill of MKoffo. The inspection was more
hurried than usual that day. Then he returned to
the hill of Kawa Kendi to hold court in the big marquee
tent. After a lunch and a long siesta in the heat of
the noonday he strolled around the village superintending
the rasing of huts and the staking out of
the new village which was to rise upon the ashes of
the old one, a concrete example of the wisdom and
power of the new lord, Eyes-in-the-hands.</p>

<p>Under squads of askaris gangs of prisoners, criminal
and political, bound by a light chain about each neck,
laboured at clearing away charred stumps and debris,
while other natives portered in saplings and loads of
grass, each village which had submitted sending its
allotted quota.</p>

<p>Trumpets blared. The keepers of the coughing
monsters made magical dances with their fire sticks
up on the hill of Kawa Kendi. The black, white
and red totem of the conqueror fluttered to earth
like a wounded bird. Night closed like a black
lid placed upon the steaming cauldron of the
sun.</p>

<p>After dinner zu Pfeiffer sat in his private tent at
<pb n="183"/><anchor id="Pg183"/>
the rear of the marquee drinking brandy. Upon a
camp table covered by a violet cloth was the portrait
in the ivory frame at which he gazed as he smoked.
The blue eyes and the feminine lips softened as
sentimentally as any sex-starved Puritan virgin;
perhaps not in spite of, but because of, a medi&aelig;val
code as senseless as the native system of tabu, for
natural emotions suppressed find an outlet in some
form.</p>

<p>From outside came the twitter and hum of the
forest, the rhythm of frogs, the dim bleating of a goat
and the distant wailing of the women&rsquo;s death lament.
Zu Pfeiffer drank and smoked and stared at the portrait
in the ivory frame. Once he slapped irritably at a
mosquito which had escaped the double net over the
tent door. A wave of emotion seemed to well within
him. He looked as if he were about to blubber as
leaning over the table he peered intently at the pictured
face and whispered:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 5" type="song">
  <l>&ldquo;Nur einmal noch m&ouml;cht ich dich sehen,</l>
  <l>Und sinken vor dir aufs Knie</l>
  <l>Und sterbend zu dir sprechen:</l>
  <l>&lsquo;Madam, ich liebe Sie!&rsquo; &hellip;</l>
</lg>

<p><q>Lucille! &hellip; Ach, Lucille!</q></p>

<p>He drew himself back with a jerk, drank his brandy
at a gulp and called angrily:</p>

<p><q>Bakunjala!</q></p>

<p>The flutter of sand preceded a gasped:</p>

<p><q>Bwana!</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer gave him an irritable command. Four
<pb n="184"/><anchor id="Pg184"/>
minutes elapsed during which he gazed steadily at
the portrait. He turned at the slither of feet. Bright
blue beads glittered in the lamplight as the daughter
of Bamana sank upon her heels.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD17" type="chapter">
<pb n="185"/><anchor id="Pg185"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 17</hi>
</head>

<p>In his favourite seat by the door of his hut sat
Zalu Zako waiting as patiently as only a native can
to see the white man, symbol of a subconscious hope.
The fact that Bakuma had not been found by the
emissaries of the bloodthirsty Bakahenzie evoked a
sensation of pleasure which was expressed merely in
a feeling of well-being. Of her in person he thought
consciously little; his attitude was much as a white
lover who might discover his loved one to be a sister,
and hence, by consanguinity, barred from him for ever,
a terrible fact of fate; but, lacking the sentimental
inhibition, Zalu Zako did not disguise the death wish
because she was denied him. Desires are simpler in
the savage, yet the driving motives are the same as
in the <q>cultured</q> ex-animal overlaid with generations
of inhibitions&mdash;tabus&mdash;which form complex strata
making the truth more and more difficult to recognise.
From that very obfuscation of motives arises
civilisation.</p>

<p>Then from the blue depths of the humid green came
a great outcry, answered by the ululation of the
women in warning.</p>

<p><q>Eyes-in-the-hands!</q> grunted Zalu Zako, voicing
the perpetual fear of the camp, as he leaped for his
gun which Moonspirit had sent him.</p>

<p>Above the medley of sounds arose an articulate
shout:</p>
<pb n="186"/><anchor id="Pg186"/>

<p><q>He has bewitched our souls! He has bewitched
our souls!</q></p>

<p>Zalu Zako paused and listened; replaced the gun
and squatted, resuming his pose of dignity before the
first man made entrance. For a few moments the
shrilling of the women and the wild jabber continued.
Then entered a slave followed by a warrior who,
excitedly falling upon his knees, gasped out:</p>

<p><q>He hath bewitched our souls! He hath bewitched
our souls! Our spears were blunted by his magic!
Our swords were turned by the wall of his soul! He
is a mighty magician!</q></p>

<p><q>Of whom speakest thou, fool?</q></p>

<p>As Zalu Zako put the question the tall figure of
Bakahenzie stalked slowly into the courtyard. The
warrior rose and fled at a command from Zalu Zako.
Bakahenzie greeted him gravely and very elaborately
took snuff in order to show how casual the matter
was. When he had meticulously restored the cork
of twisted leaves, he announced slowly:</p>

<p><q>As I have prophesied the breaking of the sacred
circle has delivered us into the hands of the false
magician, Eyes-in-the-hands. The daughter of Bakala
is even now at the camp of the white man, whom they
call Moonspirit.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> commented Zalu Zako.</p>

<p><q>The brother of Eyes-in-the-hands hath taken her
in concubinage,</q> continued Bakahenzie.</p>

<p>Zalu Zako made no response. Grimly approached
Marufa and squatted beside them.</p>

<p><q>Even as I have prophesied,</q> commented Marufa,
who never failed to seize an opportunity of suggestion.</p>

<p><q>I bade him render up the Bride of the Banana;
<pb n="187"/><anchor id="Pg187"/>
but she hath bitten his soul in his sleep. He held her
in his arms. He breathed upon her so that she would
not obey. The magic of this brother of Eyes-in-the-hands
hath indeed rotted the livers of our people, for
they fled like young jackals.</q></p>

<p><q>Eh!</q></p>

<p>Zalu Zako stared cautiously at the compound fence;
Marufa regarded Bakahenzie&rsquo;s left knee with interest.
For fully five minutes no word was said. Then
Bakahenzie portentously:</p>

<p><q>Tarum demands the brother of Eyes-in-the-hands,
this Moonspirit, for if one be taken then will
the other, Eyes-in-the-hands, wither away and the
Unmentionable One will be revealed.</q></p>

<p><q>Thou hast spoken!</q> assented Marufa.</p>

<p>But Zalu Zako continued to stare blankly at the
fence. His mind was aflame for Bakuma. Bakahenzie
had no suspicion of his passion, yet the fear of his
enmity acted like a douche of water in spite of the
fact that the implicit faith in the doctors had been
weakened. But disbelief was not positive enough to
stimulate action. However, from the news of Bakuma&rsquo;s
proximity, he had gotten strength to doubt the
efficacy of Bakuma&rsquo;s sacrifice to restore the kingdom,
a strength which prompted him to say:</p>

<p><q>Who is he that has said that Moonspirit be the
twin of Eyes-in-the-hands? Enemies there are even
among whites. If he be an enemy of Eyes-in-the-hands
and he be a great magician, as they say, then
through his magic may not Eyes-in-the-hands be
slain?</q></p>

<p><q>He hath but young words,</q> asserted Bakahenzie
stonily.</p>
<pb n="188"/><anchor id="Pg188"/>

<p><q>But Mungongo, the son of Marula, saith that&qdash;</q></p>

<p><q>Dost thou ask an infant to teach thee to hunt?</q>
retorted Bakahenzie.</p>

<p><q>Doth a warrior ask his women to mend his
wounds?</q> added Marufa, putting in a gentle reminder
that Zalu Zako was merely a chief and not of the
craft.</p>

<p><q>He hath been exorcised, let him be brought and
put to the test before me,</q> persisted Zalu Zako.</p>

<p><q>That may not be,</q> objected Bakahenzie, <q>for
thou art not yet anointed.</q></p>

<p><q>But that which is necessary has not yet been
done,</q> objected Zalu Zako obstinately. <q>If he have
no magic and his heart be not white, then let him be
doomed for the Feast of the Moon.</q> And gaining
courage, added the royal phrase: <q>I have spoken.</q></p>

<p>The three sat motionless. The silence twittered
and hummed. The shadows swelled. Bakahenzie
rose slowly and stalked away through the compound.
Zalu Zako watched his departure without remark
or expression. After an interval, Marufa also went.</p>

<p>Another person upon whom the news of the
discovery had had a similar reaction was MYalu.
Her proximity released the primitive desire to go forth
and seize her. But such action was arrested by fear
of the consequences from his fellows to whom the
tabu was still real, and of the white man, Moonspirit.
MYalu could never overcome the fiat of the witch-doctors
while he remained with them. Yonder&mdash;his
decision to go with Yabolo and Sakamata was
clinched, but&mdash;he would take Bakuma with him.</p>

<p>Straight to the hut of Bakahenzie, who seemed to
be expecting him, stalked Marufa. Marufa squatted
<pb n="189"/><anchor id="Pg189"/>
solemnly near to him. These catastrophic events
had caused a general unrest which had weakened the
discipline of superstition.</p>

<p>There are two types of magicians: those who are
partially conscious hypocrites, and those who are
gulled by their own fakes; for he who makes magic
must be ever ready with an explanation of failure and
very ingenious in the making. The fool, believing
in his own medicine, is as much astounded at failure
as the victim is angry. Bakahenzie and Marufa
belonged to the first class; yet being of their particular
mental development they were possessed of beliefs
just as deeply as the most credulous layman. That
the wizard, personally, of his own individual power
could slay an enemy by incantation they did not believe;
but that the spirit of the Banana or of other inanimate
objects could do so, they believed most profoundly.
Their creed was a form of pure animism; the storms,
the winds, the lightning, trees, rocks, rivers had
separate and conscious souls; other inanimate objects
not included in an arbitrary list, had unconscious
souls, each and every one capable of doing mischief
or of good; hence the essence of religion in the act
of imploring the good offices of the most powerful
spirits, or in moments of exasperation of threatening
them with dire punishments. Their hypocrisy lay
not in disbelief but in pretending to the people that
their intercession with the gods was infallible; they
knew only too well that the said gods would seldom
incline an ear to the magician.</p>

<p>Of course nearly every doctor had a slightly different
dogma, usually based upon an incorrect deduction
from a false premise. One doctor would place all his
<pb n="190"/><anchor id="Pg190"/>
confidence in the spirit of the Banana&mdash;the most
popular spirit; and another in the spirit of the river,
because out of a dozen times that he had implored
aid, five <q>miracles</q> at least had been vouchsafed,
therefore, argued he, the spirit of the river is the true
and most powerful god. The arguments of others
were equally unsound as they were dominated by some
hidden desire, much as reputable scientists, while
rejecting phenomena accepted by the populace, cling
fatuously to a belief in spooks in order to satisfy a
subconscious desire for immortality, fear of death.</p>

<p>Hence the confusion in the heart of Bakahenzie.
To him it appeared that the spirits had deserted him
entirely; to him it seemed that perhaps these white
men had indeed the true <q>magic,</q> the art of controlling
the spirits to their will. This terror had urged
him to the destruction of the white man, Moonspirit.
Now Zalu Zako had mutinied, and being unaware
of the powerful impulse from which Zalu Zako had
gotten this sudden strength, Bakahenzie attributed it
to the magic influence of Moonspirit. At any cost,
he argued, must Zalu Zako and the white man be
kept apart.</p>

<p>But other pressing points were how to accomplish
the slaughter of the white man, and what he should
do now after the attempt to kill him had failed. Either
Moonspirit would flee, which would be most happy proof
to Bakahenzie that he was an impostor and no magician,
or he would seek revenge immediately. No other
action was conceivable to Bakahenzie. Therefore in
such a case the obvious act was to strike the quicker.
He contemplated his colleague without looking at
him. What was his attitude? Bakahenzie, on general
<pb n="191"/><anchor id="Pg191"/>
principles, was suspicious. If Marufa thought that by
supporting the white man he might be able to attain
Bakahenzie&rsquo;s overthrow and gain the position of chief
<corr sic="witch doctor"><anchor id="E26"/><ref
target="e26">witch-doctor</ref></corr>,
he would do it, even as he, Bakahenzie,
would have done in his place. Therefore upon these
matters did he talk very guardedly with Marufa, who
was unusually reticent. However, after communing
with himself in sphinx-like gravity, Marufa assented to
the proposal that Zalu Zako be isolated in the godhood
immediately.</p>

<p>So the slow rhythmic beat, which was the summons
to the craft to assemble, throbbed in the clammy air.
Before the humid shadows had lengthened a hand&rsquo;s
breadth, were some twenty wizards, greater and lesser,
fully dressed in the green feathers of the order, collected
within the compound of Bakahenzie. Silently and
woodenly they squatted in a half circle before the
chief witch-doctor, each and every one excited by the
marvellous stories circulated by the warriors returned
from the camp of Moonspirit, stories which amply
corroborated the tales of Mungongo. Those who
supported Bakahenzie&rsquo;s party believed implicitly,
because they wished so to do, the <q>reason</q> for the
impotence of their united magic to be the breaking of
the magic circle by Bakuma. But others who cherished
personal ambitions for the head witch-doctorship
were suspicious of each other and of Bakahenzie, each
one according to his grade and consequent knowledge
in the craft.</p>

<p>When the drum had ceased and they sat in impressive
silence, Bakahenzie, squatting motionless on the
threshold of his hut, began to mutter incantations and
to rock from side to side. Now every one of the inner
<pb n="192"/><anchor id="Pg192"/>
cult knew well enough that this performance was
merely a ceremony prescribed by tradition and
expediency; yet for that very reason and particularly
for the benefit of the lesser wizards, they solemnly
accepted it, grunting in chorus as heartily as the others
to the chant of Bakahenzie. As suddenly as dramatically,
Bakahenzie stopped with eyes staring upon another
world and fell upon his back, to scream and to writhe
realistically as practice assured him. Then when the
mouth was flecked with foam, the spirit of Tarum spake
through the rigid body which lay as in catalepsy with
eyes inverted:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Aie! Aie! I am the spirit of Kintu!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I am he who first was!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I am the banana from whom I was made!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! The time of the nuptial draweth nigh!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! But where is the bride of my bed?</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! Let her be found and prepared!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! For my lips are athirst for her blood!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! Let the son of the Snake be anointed!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! Let him be ready to assist at my feast!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I have spoken, I, the father of Men!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I, Tarum, the soul of your ancestors!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>From the assembly came the low belly grunt of
acceptance, for they were, by suggestion, infected
with the induced hysteria almost as much as the superb
actor himself; they believed; even the members of
the inner cult were convinced for the moment that
indeed the mighty spirit of their ancestors was speaking.</p>

<p>Slowly, with many prodigious grunts and twists, did
<pb n="193"/><anchor id="Pg193"/>
Bakahenzie&rsquo;s soul return to his body. He sat up and
after a long pause said impressively:</p>

<p><q>What hath He said unto you?</q></p>

<p>And Marufa, as solemnly, related all that He had
said.</p>

<p><q>Eh!</q> said Bakahenzie tonelessly, <q>it is even as
I have prophesied. These indeed are the words of
wisdom. Is it not so, O my brethren?</q> Again
came the low grunt of assent. <q>Let us obey, that
these foul spirits may pass and the Unmentionable
One return unto his children!</q></p>

<p>Then, according to custom, all save those of the
inner cult arose and went forth silently. In the heart
of Yabolo, as he squatted as expressionless as the
others, was satisfaction, for he saw, or thought he saw,
that Eyes-in-the-hands would be pleased with the
destruction of a man who might possibly become his
rival; and on that principle imagined himself introduced
by his relative, Sakamata, to Eyes-in-the-hands
as the slayer, or initiator of the slaying, of his rival,
Moonspirit. That Zalu Zako should be anointed
King-God suited him as well as the other wizards and
for the same reason. Therefore Yabolo for once
raised no objection to the behests of Bakahenzie.</p>

<p>Already from the encampment rose the excited
voices of the warriors who had been informed of the
decision of the assembly of wizards. But the shadows
were long. The forest was even more thickly peopled
with spirits than their own park-like country. One
of the inner cult of five suggested that the attack be
made at dawn; but Bakahenzie, still baited by uncertainty
regarding the reality of the magic of Moonspirit
and the possible influence of Zalu Zako now that he
<pb n="194"/><anchor id="Pg194"/>
had apparently developed a will of his own before they
could shut him up in the godhead, was for immediate
action, and insisted that they call together the warriors
and make special magic to protect them from the forest
demons. Yabolo, as anxious as Bakahenzie, became his
ally in urging that this be done. But Marufa was
not at all of this way of thinking. While the fate of
Zalu Zako was quite immaterial, his attitude to Moonspirit
was much the same as the young man&rsquo;s, but
prompted by a different motive; a power possible to
utilize for his benefit. But he said no word, listening
indifferently apparently to the throbbing of the drums
summoning the warriors. When the inner circle
broke up he stalked solemnly to his own hut, but when
he was within he took from a gourd a special amulet,
slipped through a hole in the palisade behind the hut,
and disappeared into the forest.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD18" type="chapter">
<pb n="195"/><anchor id="Pg195"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 18</hi>
</head>

<p>Meanwhile the object of Bakahenzie&rsquo;s political
perplexities was also holding a council of war.
Mungongo and Bakuma were divided in opinion. The
former had recovered his complete confidence in
Moonspirit. After the repulse of the greatest magician
and his warriors he became filled with a martial ardour
and strongly advocated advancing upon the village
immediately. Birnier smiled and considered. As a
matter of fact the plan was not so utterly insane as it
appeared. Did he follow up swiftly upon the heels
of the terror-stricken warriors the probability was that
the whole camp would be infected by the spirit of panic
and bolt. However, he could not see any object to
be attained by stampeding the village. Mungongo,
ever eager for a miracle, urged that Moonspirit should
take upon him the spirit form and descend upon them
at night. To his disgust Moonspirit refused, so
Mungongo retired to the fire and consoled himself by
another vivid description of the powers of his master&mdash;growing
every day!&mdash;to Bakuma, who sat and
listened dully with ever an anxious eye and ear upon
the forest trail.</p>

<p>Bakuma was obsessed by terror inspired by the fact
that Bakahenzie had discovered her presence; the
inherent awe of the witch-doctor which had been
temporarily allayed by the presence of the white, was
revived, as well as the inevitability of her doom. Only
<pb n="196"/><anchor id="Pg196"/>
the strict injunctions of Moonspirit prevented her
fleeing through the jungle to take refuge in some distant
goatherd village. She was convinced the wizard
would soon find out where she had gone; for she was
persuaded that Bakahenzie had discovered her former
hiding place by magic divination, maintaining as proof
that although she had been as usual completely hidden
in the undergrowth, Bakahenzie had walked directly
to her.</p>

<p>Birnier foresaw that the situation might become
serious. Bakahenzie&rsquo;s attitude was one of suspicion
based, he guessed correctly, on professional jealousy.
The finding of Bakuma had probably been more of an
excuse to assail the possible rival and thus to satisfy
this subconscious death wish. Now, reckoned Birnier,
Bakahenzie would probably be more exasperated than
ever at the triumph of the said rival&rsquo;s magic. He
would therefore, knowing the strength of the driving
force of religious conviction, endeavour to play upon
the emotions of the tribe by advocation of the efficacy
of appeasing their fallen god by the sacrifice of the girl,
and so work them up to an exalted state of fanaticism
to attack in force; an additional stimulant to such
action on their part would be the unconscious satisfaction
in slaying the <q>brother</q> of the one who had
invaded their country, Eyes-in-the-hands.</p>

<p>Another point was that the more a person is scared
the less easy it is for him to forgive, hence the greater
resistance to the overtures of amity. Beyond the
partially formed idea to overset zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s petty
sovereignty was the strictly professional one of studying
from the most intimate view-point possible a system
of primitive theology of a most complex and illuminating
<pb n="197"/><anchor id="Pg197"/>
kind. The main object to be attained therefore
was resolved by the best method calculated to win the
friendship and confidence of all concerned, particularly
of Bakahenzie. To Birnier, who was not as yet
conversant with the system, Bakahenzie seemed of less
importance than Zalu Zako, the King-God, or
potential King-God. Yet apparently he could not
hope to approach Zalu Zako without overcoming
the opposition offered by Bakahenzie. To give up
little Bakuma to the sacrificial orgy was unthinkable;
such an act would have appeared to him
tantamount to sacrificing the girl to attain his own
ends.</p>

<p>For precaution he placed two of his men as pickets
in the jungle to give warning of any surprise, although
he did not consider that they would be likely to renew
the attack that day; then, as usual when in difficulties,
he retired to his tent for a smoke. As he browsed
upon his estimable friend Burton, his eyes caught a
paragraph upon cures for love melancholy recommended
by the amiable doctor.</p><lb/>

<p><q>Lemnius, imstit. cap 58. admires rue and commends
it to have excellent virtues, to expel vain imaginations,
devils and to &hellip; Other things are much magnified
by writers, as an old cock, a ram&rsquo;s head, a wolf&rsquo;s heart
borne or eaten, which Mercurialis approves: Prosper
Altinus, the water of the Nile; Gomesius, all sea
water, and at seasonable times to be sick &hellip; the
bone in a stag&rsquo;s heart, a monocerot&rsquo;s horn &hellip;</q></p><lb/>

<p>He glanced up to see Bakuma squatting disconsolately
by the fire listening to the hundredth repetition
<pb n="198"/><anchor id="Pg198"/>
of his wonder working according to Mungongo. The
outline of her rounded back and hunched shoulders,
the bronze hands clasped beneath the chin and the
misty brown eyes apprehensively regarding the trail
was a sculpture of melancholy. He smiled as he
reflected that the devils and witches of Chrysostom
and Paracelsus were as real to them as the forest spirits
and the magic of Bakahenzie to this girl. After all
some of these concoctions sounded as if they should
most certainly appeal to Bakahenzie and his brethren
of the craft. He wandered off into a reverie, wondering
why it was that superstition is so hard to eradicate from
the human mind. In Birnier was a strain of humorous
melancholy which appreciated the comedy of human
marionettes made to dance to the legion of devils and
bugaboos invented by themselves, and as a stimulant
to the dominant scientific absorption was the knowledge
that upon him and his fellows depended their
only hope of release&mdash;which was the greater reason
that Bakahenzie should slay him, he added whimsically,
did he but know it!</p>

<p>Moved by the ever-present curiosity to know what
was going on inside other people&rsquo;s minds, he called
Bakuma and Mungongo to him, observing the sprightly
action of the boy moved by his faith in him for his good
in contrast to the dull movements of the girl in her
lack of confidence to make for her good. And when
they were come to him and were seated on the ground
at his feet he said to Bakuma:</p>

<p><q>Wherefore hast thou the black bird within thy
breast, O Bakuma?</q></p>

<p>She gazed up at him with the pathetic pleading of a
gazelle.</p>
<pb n="199"/><anchor id="Pg199"/>

<p><q>Do not birds seek the broken twigs for the building
of nests, O Moonspirit?</q></p>

<p><q>Truly, but why are the branches of thy tree rotted
and broken?</q></p>

<p><q>When the axe of the peasant pecks at the roots of
the tree dost thou think then that the sap runs the more
swiftly, knowing?</q></p>

<p><q>A devil hast told thee this thing, O Bakuma.
When the sun was but a man&rsquo;s height did not a jackal
break out of the forest seeking to devour, and yet the
chicken was neither hurt nor taken. Are these not
white words?</q></p>

<p><q>Truly, O Moonspirit,</q> acknowledged Bakuma
reluctantly.</p>

<p><q>Was not then the magic of Moonspirit more
potent than that of thy wizards?</q></p>

<p><q>Thy words are white,</q> she admitted.</p>

<p><q>Wherefore then hast thou ashes in thy mouth?</q></p>

<p>Bakuma dismally contemplated Birnier&rsquo;s booted
leg.</p>

<p><q>Eh!</q> grunted the sophisticated Mungongo, <q>to
those who live on the mountain the crocodile is
not!</q></p>

<p><q>Open thy breasts unto me, O Bakuma,</q> said
Birnier.</p>

<p><q>Clk!</q> she gasped, making a little gesture of
hopelessness. <q>When the sun shines are not the
flowers open? But when the night hath come where
are the flowers? The deer feed on sweet pastures, but
when the shadow of the lion falleth upon the grass hath
not a great cloud come over the world?</q></p>

<p><q>But thy lion hath fled, O Bakuma!</q></p>

<p>She gazed at the white man with curious wonderment
<pb n="200"/><anchor id="Pg200"/>
at the stupidity of one failing to comprehend the
simplest problem. She sighed and then as if with
much patience for another&rsquo;s shortcomings:</p>

<p><q>Thou hast strong magic, O white man,</q> said she,
<q>magic that makes the magic of Bakahenzie to fall as
water. Yet was the daughter of Bakala not found by
divination? Was the daughter of Bakala not revealed
to be the bride of the Banana by divination? There
shall be made magic that the voice of the one shall be
obeyed. Eh! Aiee! Aie!</q></p>

<p>The brown eyes welled opals which splashed upon a
bronze breast. As Birnier watched her, pity stimulated
a desire to relieve this symbol of self-torture, and
he thought of a favourite passage in the <q>Anatomy</q>:</p><lb/>

<p><q>Ay, but we are more miserable than others, what
shall we do? Beside private miseries, we live in
perpetual fear and danger; for epithalamiums, for
pleasant music, that fearful noise of ordnance, drums,
and warlike trumpets still sounding in our ears; instead
of nuptial torches, we have the firing of towns and
cities; for triumph, lamentations; for joy, tears.</q></p><lb/>

<p><q>Well, Bakuma,</q> said he in English, smiling
covertly, <q>we&rsquo;ll see if we can&rsquo;t get you the nuptial
torches!</q></p>

<p>Bakuma gazed at him perplexedly with big eyes.</p>

<p><q>Already Moonspirit begins the incantation of
mighty magic,</q> explained Mungongo solemnly.</p>

<p><q>Eh!</q> murmured Bakuma expectantly.</p>

<p>Birnier smoked and pondered. The walls of the
forest were growing closer in the beginning of twilight.
The soul of fear, reflected Birnier, dwells in the
<pb n="201"/><anchor id="Pg201"/>
unknown. Reveal the god in the machine and the
mystery dies. To Bakuma he said:</p>

<p><q>Listen, O Bakuma, I would speak heavy words to
thee. When thou puttest the seed of the gourd into
the ground then within half a moon there appears the
plant of the gourd; is it not so?</q></p>

<p><q>Truly,</q> answered Bakuma disinterestedly.</p>

<p><q>Is that then magic?</q></p>

<p><q>Eh!</q> commented Bakuma, as in astonishment.
<q>Nay, how could that be? Does not the soul of the
plant grow even as a child grows?</q></p>

<p><q>Good. Turn thine eyes to me.</q> Bakuma
watched the operation of striking and lighting a match
with indifference. <q>Then is this fire which I make
done by magic?</q></p>

<p><q>Truly.</q></p>

<p><q>And thou, Mungongo, what thinkest thou?</q></p>

<p><q>Moonspirit tickles the souls of my feet!</q></p>

<p><q>H&rsquo;m.</q> Birnier repressed a smile. <q>Thou
knowest that my words are white?</q></p>

<p><q>Truly.</q></p>

<p><q>Then I tell thee that this is not done by magic.</q></p>

<p><q>Ehh! Ehh!</q> chorused the twain.</p>

<p><q>This thing on the end of this thing which you call
a magic fire twig is made of&mdash;of&mdash;is made of several
kinds of&mdash;of earth found in the&mdash;earth, and when<corr
sic="&qdash;"><anchor id="E27"/><ref
target="e27">&mdash;</ref></corr>and
when&qdash;</q> He sought frantically for native
words which were not, <q>the two are brought together&mdash;as
one strikes a spear&qdash;</q> Birnier hesitated,
finding himself as perplexed as a psychologist endeavouring
to explain the abstract working of consciousness
in concrete words. <q>When one strikes a spear
upon a rock there is an eye of fire, is it not so?</q></p>
<pb n="202"/><anchor id="Pg202"/>

<p>Mungongo&rsquo;s eyes dimly reflected a growing horror.
Bakuma stared.</p>

<p><q>The magic of Bakahenzie,</q> murmured Mungongo.</p>

<p><q>Already is his soul bewitched,</q> muttered Bakuma.</p>

<p><q>Is it not so?</q> persisted Birnier.</p>

<p><q>Aye,</q> admitted Mungongo, moving uneasily and
speaking as if humouring a dangerous lunatic. <q>It is
the eye of the angry spirit of the rock.</q></p>

<p>Birnier saw his danger and made another effort.</p>

<p><q>Even so. Also thou knowest that thou canst make
fire by the rubbing together of two sticks. Is that
then magic also?</q></p>

<p><q>Truly,</q> continued Mungongo in the same tone.
<q>Can the spirits of the souls of the twigs be summoned
without the incantations by the Keeper of Fires?</q></p>

<p><q>O my God!</q> groaned Birnier, sotto voce, and
he abandoned the effort to explain combustion.
<q>Thus is it then with these that ye call the magic
fire twigs.</q></p>

<p><q>Even as we have said,</q> asserted Mungongo
triumphantly.</p>

<p>Birnier lapsed into silent defeat. Bakuma began to
edge away. As Mungongo rose came a stifled scream
from Bakuma who sprang to her feet and dashed
towards the tent; then as if recollecting that her
saviour had been bewitched by Bakahenzie, fled into
the gloom beyond. Mungongo had seized a spear
stuck in the earth near to him. As appeared the
wizened figure of Marufa, who saluted as he squatted
in the native manner, Birnier recollected that he had
been with Bakahenzie and wondered what he wanted.
Mungongo replaced his spear and came to the tent.</p>

<p><q>Greeting, O son of MTungo!</q></p>
<pb n="203"/><anchor id="Pg203"/>

<p>Marufa mumbled the orthodox return.</p>

<p><q>Thou hast need of Moonspirit?</q> demanded
Mungongo, some of his officious confidence in Birnier
returning.</p>

<p><q>Doth the leopard go to the goat pen to seek nuts?</q>
grumbled the old man. He tapped out snuff slowly
and grunted.</p>

<p>Presently said Marufa:</p>

<p><q>Moonspirit is the brother of Eyes-in-the-hands?</q></p>

<p><q>Nay,</q> answered Birnier, wondering at the persistency
of this idea. <q>Eyes-in-the-hands is of another
tribe ten moons distant from Moonspirit.</q></p>

<p>Marufa grunted. Another long pause. Then:</p>

<p><q>The magic of Moonspirit hath blunted the spears
of Bakahenzie?</q></p>

<p><q>Even so,</q> said Birnier modestly.</p>

<p><q>The son of Maliko maketh much magic that the
bride of the Banana be taken from the white stranger.</q></p>

<p><q>The monkey makes many faces and much noise, but
does he eat up the leopard?</q></p>

<p><q>The bite of the spear is more deadly than the
bleat of a goat,</q> retorted Marufa.</p>

<p><q>Doth the wise man eat the heart of a goat to gain
courage?</q></p>

<p><q>The louder the lion roars the less teeth has he!</q></p>

<p><q>But only the fool opens his mouth to see how many
he has!</q></p>

<p><q>The wise father examines the grain of the tusks
before he sells his daughter.</q></p>

<p><q>But the wise man sees the daughter before he
offers the tusks!</q></p>

<p><q>Ugm!</q></p>

<p>Marufa took more snuff and contemplated the
<pb n="204"/><anchor id="Pg204"/>
interior of the tent where a native was lighting a lamp.
Birnier reflected. Evidently Marufa had come with
an object and had inferred that he had something to
bargain about. What was it? Also he wanted to be
sure that he was setting his trap at the right pool.
Birnier decided that he was probably acting on his own
initiative and willing to conspire against Bakahenzie.
An impulse to experiment upon him as he had upon
Mungongo and Bakuma was repressed, for from the
previous effort he had cemented the conclusion that
it was impossible to explain rational phenomena to
irrational minds; that as ever the adventurous
champion of reason would be either regarded as
insane or inspired; that which is not comprehended is
divine or ridiculous. However, through Marufa might
come a suggestion for the tactics of campaign to gain
the good-will of Bakahenzie or Zalu Zako and the
attainment of his scientific object&mdash;as well as to give
Bakuma the torches he had promised her. Whether
I will or no, he reflected smiling in the dark, must I
be either a magician or a fool. Fools get nowhere;
witch-doctors do here as elsewhere. He saw that
in order to influence these peoples or any others, he had
perforce to work in terms of their own understanding,
as the early Christian missionaries practised in their
conversion of the Teutons, the Scandinavians and the
Britons. A nucleus of a plan had been given by
Mungongo&rsquo;s impetuous suggestion. He decided to
develop it. But through Marufa, who first of all must
be impressed with the fact that Moonspirit was the
greatest magician the world had ever seen. So
therefore he called to the native within: <q>O Bakombi,
put out the light.</q> And to Marufa: <q>O wise man,
<pb n="205"/><anchor id="Pg205"/>
thunder has not always lightning. Behold! I am part
of that which is and is not!</q></p>

<p><q>Clk!</q></p>

<p>A click of astonishment was squeezed from Marufa
by the chance mystic phrase which was interpreted by
him as referring to the Unmentionable One.</p>

<p>Then taking out his metal box of vestas Birnier
moistened one. As he rubbed around his eyes Marufa,
who was expecting a miracle, observed the growing
phosphorescence in stoical calm, while Mungongo,
delighted at the long deferred proof of his boasts,
grunted admiringly.</p>

<p>But when a glowing skeleton hand, which Birnier
had prepared behind his back, hovered over the old
wizard&rsquo;s head, he grunted and made a slight convulsive
movement.</p>

<p><q>Have no fear, O my friend,</q> came Birnier&rsquo;s voice,
<q>the spirit loves my friends and destroys my enemies.</q></p>

<p>That belly grunt had registered the degree of
impression that Birnier sought. So he lighted the
lamp, bade the excited Mungongo to bring out the
phonograph, a machine adjusted with the recording
cylinders as well as the reproduction, and after a
successful demonstration of magic, discussed with
Marufa a certain scheme to which the old wizard, quick
to see the possibilities, afforded many invaluable
suggestions.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD19" type="chapter">
<pb n="206"/><anchor id="Pg206"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 19</hi>
</head>

<p>When Zalu Zako was notified of the verdict of
the Council and the words of Tarum the sense
of the inevitable returned, extinguishing the spark of
rebellion that had been kindled by his passion for
Bakuma. To Bakahenzie, or to the wizards separately,
or collectively, he had had the strength to voice his own
desires, but to the veritable voice of Tarum was no
resistance dared. He was bidden to preside by right
and precedent at the anointing of the warriors. He
did not make any feint at refusal, for his will was
crushed, as it had been weeks before by the doom of
godhood and celibacy.</p>

<p>Beyond the fact that Bakuma would soon be forbidden
to him for ever, he did not think; desire was
strangled. Even the recollection that Bakahenzie had
stated that Moonspirit had taken her gave him no
reaction. To him as to his brethren, while in physical
love is bound up the control of the universe, because
it is vaguely apprehended as a creative force, it is of no
importance to the individual lover unless he be guilty
of breaking the sexual tabu: if the girl is not a consenting
party to the illicit union then she is free; if
she is, then it is death to both of them, for as every one
knows, such criminal action endangers the balance of
the burden of the world upon the shoulders of the
King-God. Thus it was that the words of Bakahenzie
had produced no reaction against Moonspirit in the
<pb n="207"/><anchor id="Pg207"/>
mind of Zalu Zako; indeed, if the words were true
and he could yet obtain Bakuma, she might have a son
by the white which would obviously bring the marvellous
power of white magic to his successor, the next
King-God; and possibly, had mused Zalu Zako, dimly
straining at such a radical thought against the influence
of the priesthood, make the king more powerful a
magician than the witch-doctors themselves.</p>

<p>But he obeyed the mandate and took his place as
bidden. Bakahenzie had caused preparation to be
begun immediately for the ceremony of making
enchantment against the spirits of the night. In the
circle of cleared ground, where sat the temporary
Council of Elders, big fires were lighted as the dark
wall of the forest drew in upon them. Bakahenzie
squatted before a big calabash, specially reserved and
enchanted for the making of magic, in which a mess of
certain herbs whose spirits were violent haters of the
demons of all trees, rocks and streams, were to be
released from the vegetable bondage by stewing that
they might be distributed among the warriors for the
night assault. These warriors, some fifty chosen
from the followers of Bakahenzie and Marufa, sat on
their hams within the circle of fires, uneasily casting
glances behind them at the deepening sepia, from
whence arose the nocturnal chant of the spirits of the
forest. In order to insure no interference from
malign animals, Bakahenzie caused to be brought a pure
white goat whose throat was cut and bled into the
cauldron; for as any one knows, that soul which is
white must necessarily fight well against anything that
be black. Yet in spite of this potent magic the
warriors grew unquiet; they felt, rather than thought,
<pb n="208"/><anchor id="Pg208"/>
that if the magic of their witch-doctors had failed
against one white why should it succeed against another
like unto him? And their faith thus weakened,
doubts regarding the efficacy of the same magic against
spirits of the forest bred as mosquitoes after rain.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie remarked the uneasiness, but the stronger
grew his need to restore the waning confidence in his
powers by removing the white; the blood desire had
now been transferred from Bakuma to Moonspirit as
the most effective demonstration possible to him.</p>

<p>The fires smouldered and flickered yellow tongues
upon the greens of the warriors&rsquo; bodies and the blues of
the wizards&rsquo; head-dresses. Faint blue vapour swirled
around the scarlet feather above Bakahenzie&rsquo;s graven
face as he muttered incantations and stirred the
cauldron. Then as the drums throbbed and the
warriors grunted rhythmically to Bakahenzie&rsquo;s song of
enchantment came a squawk as of a parrot. The chant
ceased. Branches rustled. Every head quirked automatically
towards the sound. Came a low belly grunt
of terror as if an invisible hand had punched them in
their solar <corr sic="plexes"><anchor id="E28"/><ref
target="e28">plexus</ref></corr>.</p>

<p>Just in the shadow line where the glow of the fires
faintly tinted and greened the curves of his bronze body
against the sepia of his feathers, appeared the figure of
Marufa, his spear lifted on high as he cried out in a
loud voice:</p>

<p><q>Greetings, O people of the Banana, I bring you
tidings of him who is and is not, of him who was lost
and yet is come. &lsquo;Behold, I show you a sign!&rsquo;</q></p>

<p>Against the gloom his left arm and hand glowed with
a strange light. An unanimous <q>Ehh!</q> rose from
the assembled warriors and wizards alike.</p>
<pb n="209"/><anchor id="Pg209"/>

<p><q>Raise your ears!</q> continued Marufa, <q>that the
Voice may speak unto you!</q></p>

<p>In the silence came a subdued click and commenced
a high-pitched voice in the dialect:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Aie! Aie! I am the spirit of Kintu!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I am he who first was!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I am the Banana from whom I was made!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>Whites of eyes glimmered like butterflies in starlight.
Nothing was visible. The voice appeared to
rise from every direction. The new miracle petrified
the limbs of all.</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Aie! Aie! My soul is defiled and my children enslaved!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! My face hath been scratched by an alien claw!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I send you the revenge which is white!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I send you the One who is bidden!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! Let that One arise who is I!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! The mighty One who will blot out the curse!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I have spoken, I, the Father of Men!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aie! I, Tarum; the soul of your Ancestors!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>A faint whirr as of wings was drowned in the automatic
grunt of acceptance squeezed from all the
warriors and the wizards by the sacred chant, except
those of the inner circle. In dread sat the warriors of
the terrible magic of their doctors which they had once
doubted. But the minds of Bakahenzie, Yabolo, and
the other two master craftsmen were stunned. The
<pb n="210"/><anchor id="Pg210"/>
phenomenon of the glowing hand had they never seen
before, but they recollected the stones of Mungongo.
Even was Sakamata, sophisticated to the wonders of
Eyes-in-the-hands, impressed and bewildered. Dormant
awe for the Unmentionable One was awakened
in every one of them. Zalu Zako felt that his doom
was upon him; that the Unmentionable One was about
to call him to his duty, which invoked fear for the
sacrilege he had committed in entertaining such
radical thoughts in the immediate past. But in
Bakahenzie was a streak of suspicion; how was it that
Marufa was thus chosen as the divine messenger? Yet
perhaps the veritable god was, or gods were, speaking!
Doubt held him silent.</p>

<p><q>O my brethren, would ye that we seek the voice
of the Unmentionable One?</q> cried Marufa.</p>

<p><q>Ough! Ough!</q> grunted the wizards.</p>

<p>Marufa stalked slowly to the nearest fire, muttering
a spell. From his loin cloth he took the three digital
bones of an enemy and proceeded to discover the
whereabouts by geomancy. And behold! the fingers
pointed in one direction which all could see. Oblivious
to the tight indifference of Bakahenzie the old
man rose and began to gyrate, mumbling incantations,
towards a thicket of grass on the fringe of the
undergrowth, holding aloft the magic bones in the
glowing hand. Anxiously the assembly watched the
skinny figure, half bent, glide out from the glow of the
fires into the blue shadows. A small log collapsed,
throwing a red gleam upon the form poised upright
before the clump of grass as Marufa cried out:</p>

<p><q>Let him who-may-not-be-mentioned speak that
his children may hear!</q></p>
<pb n="211"/><anchor id="Pg211"/>

<p>Immediately commenced a high voice chanting:</p>

<p><q>Take up, O Marufa, the wise, the pod of my soul!</q></p>

<p>Then in the sight of every man Marufa bent upon
his knees, muttering, and arose unharmed. Save for
the slow turn of each head the better to follow the
progress of the magician no limb nor muscle moved as
in silence Marufa bore the like of which had never
before been seen; a thing like unto a stone, having
an ear almost as large and as erect as an angry elephant,
the colour of a lion yet hairless. <q>The pod of the soul</q>
Marufa placed within the circle of the fires so that all
should see. More incantations did Marufa make,
sitting fearlessly; he caressed it as a young man caresses
a maid and came forth again the voice of Tarum:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Rejoice, O my children, for he that is bidden shall come!</l>
  <l>Rejoice, O ye warriors, for he that shall lead you shall come!</l>
  <l>Rejoice, O ye wizards, for he that is greater than ye shall come!</l>
  <l>Rejoice, O ye women, for he that fertilizes shall come!</l>
  <l>He shall eat up your enemies as a lion eateth buck.</l>
  <l>He shall make your dead to be seen and your phantoms to talk!</l>
  <l>He shall give to your women to have sons of your breed!</l>
  <l>He shall give you that which was slain on the hill!</l>
  <l>He that walks in a flame in the night!</l>
  <l>He that is whiter than the flesh of the baobab!</l>
  <l>He shall come forth bearing that which ye seek!</l>
  <l>He shall come forth bearing that which is yours!</l>
  <l>Hear me, my people, and give voice to my word!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>
<pb n="212"/><anchor id="Pg212"/>

<p><q>Ough! Ough!</q> came the chorus of assent.</p>

<p>Not a limb nor a hand moved among the concourse
of warriors and wizards until a new voice, deep, as one
who commands, cried out:</p>

<p><q>Let the son of Kawa Kendi, the son of MFunya
MPopo, the son of MKoffo, move not; neither he nor
Marufa, the son of MTungo! Unto ye others we say
unto you, depart that we speak in peace with this
our son and priest!</q></p>

<p>And simultaneously appeared in the gloom of the
undergrowth three pairs of eyes as luminous as the glowworm,
vaster than any human; and beside the souls
of the dead King-Gods were terrible hands. Warriors
and wizards, all save Bakahenzie and Zalu Zako,
literally leaped for the forest and village in one convulsive
bound and grunt. Zalu Zako had remained
upon the ground, green with terror. Bakahenzie
stood upright, his scarlet feather fluorescent in the fire-glow.
The anthem of the forest was only broken by
the rustle of branches and the breathing of Zalu Zako
and Bakahenzie. A harsh voice cried:</p>

<p><q>Begone, Bakahenzie, son of a dog! Lest we take
thy soul to be with us!</q></p>

<p>The eyes appeared to float nearer; hands pointed
menacingly. Bakahenzie boggled; hesitated; then
the dignity of his pose melted into the graceful bounds
of a fleeing leopard. Even for the professional ghost
manipulator, such a phenomenon of the spirits, with
whom he was supposed to be on familiar terms, was
demoralizing. But half-way through a thicket of
undergrowth, where he could no longer see the horrific
eyes, his courage began to return.</p>

<p>To his ears came a new voice chanting:</p>
<pb n="213"/><anchor id="Pg213"/>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Sweeter than warm honey is the scent of my man!</l>
  <l>Fiercer than scorpions is the grip of his hand!</l>
  <l>Whiter than a spear flash is the gleam of his teeth!</l>
  <l>Smoother than river stone is the feel of his chest!</l>
  <l rend="margin-left: 15">Bakuma rejoices!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>Peering through the interstices Bakahenzie could see
the gleam of the fire upon the bangles of the Son-of-the-Snake
and the blue flash upon his spear as he melted
into the forest wall.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD20" type="chapter">
<pb n="214"/><anchor id="Pg214"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 20</hi>
</head>

<p>The actual sight of spirits from ghostland, of
which hitherto they had only heard, had been too
much for the nerves of the tribe already overstrung
by the overthrow of the idol and the magic and
slaughter of zu Pfeiffer; the warriors had fled
like scared poultry to the jungle, up trees, in
the undergrowth and in their huts, where they
cowered among their women and slaves, reading
awful omens and portents in every sound of the
forest.</p>

<p>The phenomenon had been just as startling and
awe-inspiring to Bakahenzie as it had been to his most
ignorant dupe. His belief in ghostland was implicit,
but now he had seen what, professionally, he was
supposed to see and converse with on familiar terms.
As Zalu Zako disappeared he continued to listen
intently. Above the slight rustle of the bushes as
the Son-of-the-Snake moved through the undergrowth
rose a feminine laugh. Bakahenzie&rsquo;s liver was squeezed
by that sardonic chuckle; for, as is well known, female
demons are much more malignant than the male. For
the space of a chant he remained crouching there,
curiosity and the dread of revealing his terror to his
fellows tugging at his feet and fear of the demons
clutching him around the waist. Save the anthem
of the forest no further sound of the ghosts was
audible.</p>
<pb n="215"/><anchor id="Pg215"/>

<p>Cautiously rose Bakahenzie, wriggled out of his
nest and with as much dignity as maybe, strode back
to the fire. From the village came a slight whimpering.
With satisfaction Bakahenzie noted that no one else
was in sight. For another space he sat with unquiet
eyes and ears upon the forest. Then gathering
courage as nothing happened, he pondered upon what
attitude he should assume.</p>

<p>Yabolo stalked from round a hut and squatting
calmly beside Bakahenzie, nonchalantly proceeded to
tap out snuff and offered some to Bakahenzie, who
grunted acceptance and sniffed with even greater
indifference. Motionless they continued to sit and
silently. Bakahenzie wondered whether Yabolo knew
that he, too, had fled, and Yabolo, who did know,
waited for the first move on Bakahenzie&rsquo;s part to
retort.</p>

<p>Yabolo, indeed, who had been as panic-stricken as
Bakahenzie, was more suspicious in view of the
accounts he had heard of the magic of Eyes-in-the-hands.
Who knew but this vision might not be another
manifestation of Eyes-in-the-hands? And more
slowly a similar idea began to occur to Bakahenzie,
save that he had in mind the incident of Moonspirit&rsquo;s
magic in the face of his bravest warriors. The calmer
he became the more was he inclined to accept this
explanation of the apparitions; such was infinitely more
comforting to him than the conception that they had
been in truth spirits from ghostland. As the
doubt grew the wisdom of propitiating this powerful
Moonspirit became apparent; yet was present the
dread of loosing what remained of his autocratic
power. The problem now was to enlist the white
<pb n="216"/><anchor id="Pg216"/>
and discover some means of controlling him and his
magic.</p>

<p>But to both men the vital question was, what had
become of Zalu Zako? There were two alternatives:
if the visions had been genuine ghosts, then undoubtedly
Zalu Zako was dead; but if they had been produced
through the magic of a white man, then, Bakahenzie
argued, Zalu Zako and Marufa must be in league with
Moonspirit, and Yabolo opined that Zalu Zako had
been captured by Eyes-in-the-hands. To the latter
the effect was to strengthen the determination to go
over to Eyes-in-the-hands. If the first possibility
was correct the greater need had he of strong magic
if real ghosts were taking to walking abroad visibly, and
the other case merely proved beyond question the
invincible magic of Eyes-in-the-hands. But to Bakahenzie
the reaction was slightly different, for his
elemental reason took him a little farther than
Yabolo by pointing out that in all his wide experience
never had spirits taken demons&rsquo; shape, so that the
suspicion that they had been due to Moonspirit
became more plausible, and was supported by the
recollection of Marufa&rsquo;s unexplained absence and
sudden reappearance on familiar terms with the
spirits.</p>

<p>The longer he pondered on the strange actions of
Marufa the more he was persuaded that that wily
colleague was acting upon sound information, and
the tangle of his affairs made him so desperate that
he decided to gamble upon that assumption: for
magician Bakahenzie began to realize that Marufa
had somehow scored a point and that now was
approaching the crux which would determine whether
<pb n="217"/><anchor id="Pg217"/>
he won back or lost for ever that which was the
essence of life to him.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the two puzzled plotters sat motionless
and silent as if mutually agreeing that no question
regarding each other&rsquo;s late movements had better be
asked.</p>

<p>Accordingly to the depth of his superstition returned
each witch-doctor. When they were come, without
one word of explanation, Bakahenzie lifted his voice
in a high falsetto, bidding the lay warriors to return
to hear the voice of the elders. Reassured by this
command which carried far on the still air, they began
to emerge from hut and undergrowth. The first to
arrive was MYalu, angry to find the whole assembly
of wizards apparently sitting as if they had never
moved, engaged in mystic incantations. MYalu
had not fled far and from his cranny had seen the
flight of Bakahenzie and the departure of Zalu Zako,
but he dared not betray the doctors. He squatted
sullenly and waited while the remainder of the warriors,
of whom many had also seen the general stampede,
filed to their places.</p>

<p>When all were assembled Bakahenzie looked up
from his spell and bade them to listen to what message
the faculty&mdash;for obvious policy&rsquo;s sake he included the
whole of the ghosts&mdash;had received from ghostland by
the three spirits, emphasising the vision of the magicians
as proof positive of the terrible power of the craft.
By reason of the sin committed by one who had broken
the magic circle, as they all knew, said Bakahenzie,
had this wrath of the Unmentionable One come upon
them, permitting the incarnation of a demon, Eyes-in-the-hands,
to work his will upon them and to
<pb n="218"/><anchor id="Pg218"/>
make them slaves, as were their dogs the Wamungo;
and so in the depth of their tribulation he, Bakahenzie,
whose magic had been rendered impotent
by the betrayal of the Bride of the Banana, had
invoked the spirits of the three, as they all had
witnessed.</p>

<p><q>Ough! Ough!</q> grunted the warriors in assent,
although many of them were sorely puzzled to know
why the doctors themselves had fled. Yabolo began
to grow restless in his mind. To allow Bakahenzie
to steal all the thunder and condemn the possible
source of political power to the level of an evil
demon was contrary to his policy, but he gave no
physical sign save to become engrossed in his snuff
box.</p>

<p>Then Bakahenzie continued with a long harangue
maintaining the necessity of the consummation of
the Marriage of the Banana and announced that Zalu
Zako had been taken by the spirit of his forefathers
in order to prepare magic for the eating up of the
terrible Eyes-in-the-hands; that as the voice of
Tarum had said, Zalu Zako would return with
<q>That which was slain on the hill&mdash;that which ye
seek, that which is yours.</q> Although Bakahenzie was
not sure to what these words had referred, yet he
was sagacious enough to know that if Marufa had
engineered that scene, then there must be some
plan at the back of it, and in any case knew, as any
white medicine man, that words in mystic phrasing
are always soul-satisfying to the credulous who interpret
them in terms of their subconscious desires.
Then with political prudence he avoided any reference
to uncomfortable topics, by dismissing the
<pb n="219"/><anchor id="Pg219"/>
assembly before any pertinent questions could be
asked.</p>

<p>But when Bakahenzie had retired to his hut, presumably
for the night, as Marufa had done before him,
he girded himself with an amulet containing the gall
of an enemy killed in battle and a short stabbing spear
and sallied forth through a hole in the fence to brave
the spirits of the forests in his need.</p>

<p>In the village generally sleep was not entertained
with enthusiasm by any save those women and slaves
who knew not of the great happenings. In the hut
of Yabolo were MYalu and Sakamata. From the
old men MYalu received much consolation and advice,
but no information as to why the wizards had bolted
as fast as the laymen from ghosts invoked by their
own magic. Sakamata confirmed authoritatively
Yabolo&rsquo;s suspicion that the phenomena had been
produced through the magic of Eyes-in-the-hands,
urging that they lose no time in going to him to make
submission. Yabolo had already decided on that
course, but MYalu refused to give a definite decision
as to when he would go. He sat sullenly, saying no
word, and eventually departed to his own hut
where he dismissed his wives and continued to
brood.</p>

<p>The fear and rage aroused by the anointing of the
warriors for the capture of Bakuma had been dissipated
by the general panic produced by the ghosts.
Afterwards MYalu had unconsciously hoped, because
he so desired it, that the pursuit of the Bride would
be abandoned; hence Bakahenzie&rsquo;s renewal of the
chase had angered and frightened him anew. As all
the rest of them, he wondered and pondered upon the
<pb n="220"/><anchor id="Pg220"/>
fate of Zalu Zako and Marufa. Marufa, as he well
knew, had a black heart and two tongues; therefore
was he suspicious of any manifestation with which the
son of MTungo could be connected. Zalu Zako was
wealthy; perhaps he had bribed Marufa to make
magic in order to enable him to escape the doom of
the king-godship and to flee to another country with
Bakuma under the protection of Moonspirit. A
lover&rsquo;s jealousy is as powerful a driving force as
ambition. In this case it drove even MYalu to defy
the spirits of the night, for at the hour of the monkey
he too stole away into the gloom.</p>

<p>So it was that as the patterned roof of the forest
was etched in the timid green of dawn peeped MYalu
through the gate of the zareba of Moonspirit to
discover the gaunt form of Bakahenzie squatted by
the embers of a fire within a deserted compound.
Bakahenzie&rsquo;s quick eyes, on the alert for ghosts or
any moving thing, saw him; so coldly MYalu advanced
and sat beside him, grunting the formal
greeting.</p>

<p>MYalu noted the age of the spoor about the
compound, the tent peg holes newly pulled. Now
was he sure that Marufa and Zalu Zako were in
league with Moonspirit. Wrath smouldered in his
broad chest. At length spoke Bakahenzie casually:</p>

<p><q>The Bride of the Banana hath been taken away.</q>
Bakahenzie paused as if weighing his words, and added:
<q>But the feet of spirits are heavy on the land.</q>
MYalu grunted. Bakahenzie had an idea and to
MYalu was born another about the same instant.
Said Bakahenzie, who wished to know the whereabouts
of Marufa, Moonspirit and company: <q>If the Marriage
<pb n="221"/><anchor id="Pg221"/>
of the Bride be not consummated then will the power
of Eyes-in-the-hands prevail.</q> And after a long
pause: <q>Who will seek the Bride?</q></p>

<p>MYalu remained silent, revolving his own notion in
his mind. There remained with him still many traces
of the awe and belief in the power and knowledge of
Bakahenzie, and so his words threatening the triumph
of Eyes-in-the-hands assured and strengthened his
purpose; for he thought that if he could accomplish
his plan then would Eyes-in-the-hands surely triumph
as Bakahenzie predicted. Thus it was that he
said:</p>

<p><q>O master of Wisdom, give unto me a mighty
charm against the evil eye of traitors and will I and
those that follow me seek the Bride and bring her so
that which is bidden may be, that the children of the
Banana may triumph.</q></p>

<p>MYalu rose. The two started on the return to
the village. On the road Bakahenzie sought to flatter
MYalu by pretending to take him into his confidence,
adjuring him to secrecy and informing him that
he would cause it to be known that MYalu, the
son of MBusa, would bring back the Bride of the
Banana. MYalu assented gravely. Just before reaching
the village his keen eyes noticed a slight trail
from the regular path. Broken, twisted and crushed
leaves and strained branches indicated the recent
passage of two or three people through the undergrowth.</p>

<p>With difficulty, for the Wongolo are not forest
people, he followed the spoor in a semi-circle towards the
village and a footprint in the slime revealed the track
of Zalu Zako or Marufa coming from the fires. MYalu
<pb n="222"/><anchor id="Pg222"/>
grunted, but he said nothing to Bakahenzie or anybody
else. That the vision had been caused by Moonspirit&rsquo;s
magic he had now no doubt, and his estimation
of Moonspirit&rsquo;s power increased to the point of terror;
yet the smouldering jealousy and desire for Bakuma
drove him dreadfully on.</p>

<p>Before the sun was two spans high MYalu left
the village with some two hundred of his followers
anointed against magic and spirits. The track from
Moonspirit&rsquo;s camp was like an elephant&rsquo;s path.
Through the steamy heat they followed all day until
they came out upon a river near to a village upon the
border of the forest. The headman of the village
was away with his chief; but women, children and
slaves remained. Zalu Zako, in the company of a
white man called Moonspirit, Marufa, the wizard, and
a girl had arrived, had taken three canoes and had
left up-stream within a hand&rsquo;s breadth of a shadow.
MYalu took all the canoes available and started in
pursuit, leaving the rest of his men to follow as
soon as they had procured other canoes from the
nearest village.</p>

<p>The river was small but deep and flowed swiftly
between the vast curtains of the overhanging trees.
When the dungeon of the forest was glooming to
night they saw the gleam of a fire. Swiftly and
silently they landed, surrounded the camp and uttering
the war yell, rushed.</p>

<p>But Moonspirit, Zalu Zako or Marufa they
found not&mdash;only Bakuma with some dozen Wamungo
carriers. Even the dismal squawk of a Baroto bird
could not damp the relief and joy of MYalu. Next
morning he despatched a secret messenger to Yabolo,
<pb n="223"/><anchor id="Pg223"/>
making a rendezvous at a certain village and with a
weeping Bakuma in his train set out to seek the
rest of his fortune at the camp of Eyes-in-the-hands.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD21" type="chapter">
<pb n="224"/><anchor id="Pg224"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 21</hi>
</head>

<p>In the village of Bakahenzie was discontent.</p>

<p>The desertion of Sakamata, Yabolo, and three
chiefs, had corroborated his suspicions of the unfrocked
priest. That Sakamata had been preaching open
sedition he had known, yet Bakahenzie was in the situation
of many a president or prime minister; he had
feared to put his own position in jeopardy by having
the offender removed expeditiously. This treachery,
which synchronised with the time when MYalu should
have either returned or sent a messenger, implied
another grave error. All the information he could
gather was that MYalu had returned through the village
by the river with the girl Bakuma, some prisoners and
some of the white man&rsquo;s equipment, on his way to the
north-east; but no one apparently had seen Zalu Zako,
Marufa nor the white man.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie was at a loss to discover a plausible
theory to account for MYalu having kidnapped
Bakuma, who could not be of any political importance
to him in going over to Eyes-in-the-hands, but would
rather prejudice him seriously with the rest of the tribe
for the sin of sacrilege in taking the Bride of the Banana.
Shrewd judge of his compatriots though he was, the
possibility of a love motive never occurred to Bakahenzie.
A dominating passion in an individual for
any particular female was rare in the native world;
attractive wives or concubines were chosen and
<pb n="225"/><anchor id="Pg225"/>
bought as one buys a goat or an ox. Bakuma, in her
capacity as a sacrificial victim, was to him merely a
good-looking girl, well selected by Marufa for the orgy
of the Harvest Festival.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie was distraught. He feared that he had
not the authority to prevent further desertions; he
did not know how far Sakamata&rsquo;s propaganda had
permeated; he could not guess what Zalu Zako, Marufa
and the white man were going to do. As many a
wise statesman before and after him he adopted a
policy of <q>wait and see.</q> To provide an exciting
distraction to keep his constituents amused and from
thinking too much, he borrowed another political
tactic of abusing some one vigorously. He called a
meeting of the faculty and the warriors. There he
solemnly denounced MYalu as a traitor and accused
him of the crime of having abducted the Bride of the
Banana, and consequently as the cause of the continuance
of the misfortunes of the tribe.</p>

<p>The move was successful, inasmuch that it afforded
discussion and absorbed wrath for two whole days.
Various chiefs proposed as many plans. But none
was taken. Everybody was discontented and
quarrelsome, as fearful of Eyes-in-the-hands as he
was of his tribal god; many were impressed by
the propaganda of Sakamata and Yabolo and the
impunity with which Yabolo and Sakamata and
company had quietly gone over to the enemy. Meanwhile
Bakahenzie squatted in oracular silence, murmuring
incantations that were prayers to the Unmentionable
One interlarded with promises of the things
he would accomplish for the said Deity, with solemnity
and sincerity, for he felt that the result of Marufa&rsquo;s
<pb n="226"/><anchor id="Pg226"/>
intrigue with the magician Moonspirit would mature
very shortly. What that would be he had no notion;
only he strained every nerve to be alert when the
crisis came to snatch from Marufa the advantage that
wily old man had gained.</p>

<p>On the third day two more chiefs followed in the
wake of Yabolo. Bakahenzie made no comment, but
he realised that before long, unless the unknown
happened, he would be unable to retain any of his
followers; realised that his one chance lay in procrastination.
In his despair he began to contemplate an
alliance with Marufa, even if he had to take a subordinate
r&ocirc;le&mdash;which would at any rate give him his
only ally, time, to help checkmate his colleague.</p>

<p>On the next day yet another chief and his men
departed. Bakahenzie knew that they were like a herd
of goats and that to stop the stampede he must adopt
desperate measures. To quell the restlessness which
murmured ominously throughout the camp he called
another meeting as soon as the news had come of the
last desertion. While the drum tapped out the summons
Bakahenzie sat muttering his most impressive
spells alone, endeavouring to discover a plausible excuse
for some sort of excitement to distract the public
mind.</p>

<p>Slowly and sulkily the remainder of the brethren of
the craft and those lay chiefs that were left, assembled
within the circle of fires. Squatted in the prescribed
order they eyed the figure of Bakahenzie in his red
and green feathers mumbling incantations with doubt
and disfavour. Indeed Bakahenzie seemed to them
the symbol of the fallen god and a past r&eacute;gime; impotent
and as mistaken as they were. In each and every
<pb n="227"/><anchor id="Pg227"/>
one of them were suspicions and fears growing like
weeds in tropic rain that he had made an error in not
propitiating the new god in time, an impulse which
required but a few hours&rsquo; growth to propel them out
to the north-east after Sakamata and the others.</p>

<p>As they watched in silence Bakahenzie was aware of
the state of their minds towards him and grew the
more perplexed in his search for an entertainment
sufficiently stimulating to postpone the effects of their
discontent. Sapiently he decided that any more
messages from Tarum would be unwise in the present
atmosphere. An idea of a revelation by divination to
appoint a substitute for Bakuma as the Bride of the
Banana and thus thrust forward a reason for a feast,
as there was now no Yabolo to object, was abandoned
because such an orgy was exclusive to the craft and
would serve to exasperate the lay chiefs.</p>

<p>His resource suggested a method. Suddenly he
uttered a piercing yell and fell sideways as in the manner
of one about to receive a communication from Tarum;
but instead of the habitual seizure and cries and
groans he lay rigid and silent. The divergence from
the usual distracted the doubts of the audience.</p>

<p>The fires flickered and danced to the insectile anthem
as for twenty minutes or more he lay there as one dead.
But at the first flutter of inattention among the doctors
he sat up with closed eyes and called out in a loud
voice:</p>

<p><q>That which is and must be, shall be!</q></p>

<p>Intuitively he had followed the precept of witch-doctors
the world over of saying nothing at all in such
a way that as many interpretations may be deduced
as there are listeners. Each and every doctor and
<pb n="228"/><anchor id="Pg228"/>
chief accordingly saw in these mystic words, as Marufa
had done in the chance phrase of Moonspirit, that
which he was most urged to do. Bakahenzie had
accomplished his temporary object. Once more he
cried out:</p>

<p><q>Let the children of the Banana be as the wild-cat
at the fishpool that that which I have prophesied may
come to pass!</q></p>

<p>The charging of the air with the familiar suggestion
of magical doings gripped the audience and forced
from them the conventional grunt of assent.
Bakahenzie began again to mutter incantations. He
had, he knew, averted the immediate danger for at
least another sun, or perhaps two. Now was there
only to wait and see. But Bakahenzie, as all great
men, had the distinct vein of luck that follows the
bold. Even as they squatted there, thoroughly worked
up for the reception of a miracle, came a rustle among
the leaves. Every head turned as one to see once more
the mystic gleam of eyes in the gloom as the voice of
Marufa cried:</p>

<p><q>Let there be a new fire!</q></p>

<p>From the cavern of the undergrowth emerged a
white man bearing upon his shoulders a burden which,
as he staggered into the gleam of the fires, was seen to
be in form and in shape that of the burned idol.
Then did Bakahenzie leap to his feet and in one
stroke recover his lead and fetter his most dangerous
enemy by proclaiming in a loud voice:</p>

<p><q>Behold! The bearer of the Burden of the World
even as Bakahenzie hath prophesied!</q></p>

<p>And as Birnier set down the idol, from warrior and
wizard, with the chief witch-doctor&rsquo;s declaration,
<pb n="229"/><anchor id="Pg229"/>
<q>That which is and must be, shall be,</q> echoing in
their ears, came the deep grunt of acceptance of the
new King-God of the lost Usakuma, the Incarnation
of the Unmentionable One.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD22" type="chapter">
<pb n="230"/><anchor id="Pg230"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 22</hi>
</head>

<p>In the humid heat of the forenoon the small hills
of Fort Eitel, as zu Pfeiffer had renamed the
Place of Kings, in the centre of the rased banana
plantations, resembled scabby pimples upon a shaven
patch of a green head seething with a verminous activity.</p>

<p>Across the ford of the river came a puckered-faced
Bakuma in the train of carriers and slaves of MYalu,
who with Yabolo was coming to make obeisance to
Eyes-in-the-hands, under the protection of Sakamata.
To Bakuma there was no joy in the prospect of the
sight of her old home; the bitter taste of the oleander
was in her mouth as she trudged despondently with
downcast head.</p>

<p>But the breast of MYalu was filled with the song
of the cricket. The terrors that had haunted him
throughout the journey, of being overtaken by the
magic of Bakahenzie or his emissaries, for the sacrilege
of stealing the Bride of the Banana, began to evaporate
at the approach to his village where now dwelt a new
god more powerful than any, from whom he was about
to gain protection, honours, and incidentally the ivory,
which his anxious eyes pictured still within his hut.
But when they broke from the outer banana plantation
a mighty grunt was punched from the chests of Yabolo
and MYalu at the vision of the half-completed street
of large huts in the midst of desolation.</p>

<p><q>Eh!</q> quoth Sakamata, <q>is not the way of the
<pb n="231"/><anchor id="Pg231"/>
mighty one more wonderful than he who is gone?
Behold, he maketh a city like unto that of his people,
a city of gods!</q></p>

<p>But MYalu had no admiration to spare, for to him
the alleged beauty thereof was fogged by the fact that
his own huts were but blackened ruins. The next
moment MYalu, in spite of his native dignity, started
as one of those uniformed keepers of the coughing
monsters barked at them magic words.</p>

<p>Sakamata replied. Yabolo and MYalu stiffened as
they observed the cringe of the shoulders as he fumbled
hastily within his loin-cloth and presented a piece of
hard substance, the colour of blue clay with magic
marks upon it. The demon grunted at them to proceed
as if talking to a slave. Followed in file the rest
of the caravan. As Bakuma passed the uniformed
demon standing with the sword and gun with seven
voices upon his shoulder, leered, and grunting in a
strange tongue, stepped forward and spun her round
by the shoulders. Bakuma cried out in terror and
the carriers gasped fearfully. MYalu and Yabolo
wheeled. MYalu&rsquo;s facial scar twitched with rage as
he raised his spear. But Sakamata clung to his arm
as the soldier, grinning, raised his rifle in their
direction. Bakuma ran on. The man laughed and
turned his back to them, calling out something that
the Wongolo could not understand.</p>

<p><q>Eh!</q> commented Sakamata indignantly, <q>the
dog hath eaten poison grass! We will tell his words
to Eyes-in-the-hands and he will be beaten until
he stales.</q></p>

<p>MYalu, slightly mollified by this promise of revenge,
strode on in silence, bewildered and resentful, wondering
<pb n="232"/><anchor id="Pg232"/>
at these strange things in the camp of the new god.
In a large open space resembling a public square, was
a big unfinished hut: the guest house, Sakamata
informed them, for those who sought an audience with
the Invincible One. As they squatted on the floor
waiting patiently until the sun was two hand&rsquo;s-breadth
above the hill for the appointed time, food and beer
were brought to them by a Wamungo slave. Zu
Pfeiffer was careful to foster the class distinction.
Sakamata duly held forth upon the generosity of
Eyes-in-the-hands, the wonder of his works and presence;
but his words were received in unsympathetic
silence, for the incident on the road had wounded the
dignity of both chief and witch-doctor; raised dim
fears and forebodings.</p>

<p>At length a strange sound rang out on the still hot
air. The signal, Sakamata explained, that Eyes-in-the-hands
would receive his guests. Leaving Bakuma
squatted in the lethargy which appeared to be habitual
to her now, the three slowly mounted the sacred hill,
marvelling greatly at the black triangle of the roof of
the new temple, gazing with veiled suspicion at the
gleaming brass fittings of the coughing monster in the
great gate, and eyeing uneasily the double lines of
uniformed devils, their bayonets flaming in the sun, who
were drawn up outside the green palace of Eyes-in-the-hands.</p>

<p>On each side of the tent door stood the two tallest
men in the companies, coal-black forms which towered
above the slighter build of the Wongolo, as rigid and
as silent as trees. Through this terrifying guard
walked Sakamata leading his two compatriots, already
startled and impressed. Immediately within Sakamata
<pb n="233"/><anchor id="Pg233"/>
fell upon his knees. Before them at the end of the
tent sat zu Pfeiffer in the full dress of his regiment,
plumed helmet, blazoned uniform and sword; and
beside him, erect, the two sergeants Schultz and
Ludwig in full parade uniform. Above them was a
blaze of red, white and black and in the midst another
splash of colour. But before this vision had penetrated
their brains, had risen the voice of Sakamata
bidding them to kneel likewise. Bewildered and awed
they obeyed. Then came a voice saying:</p>

<p><q>Rise, approach, O chiefs!</q></p>

<p>Accordingly they arose and following Sakamata,
advanced and squatted, their eyes dominated and held
by those myriad gleams of magic <q>eyes</q> on hands and
wrists. Then the interpreter, standing at attention,
spoke this harangue tonelessly:</p>

<p><q>Greeting and welcome, children of the Banana!
Eyes-in-the-hands who is known to the people where
the sun rises as the Eater-of-Men, hath come from
afar, the messenger of a greater than he, the Lord of
the World, the Earthquake, the World Trembler, who
eats up what he pleases, whose eyes see all things,
whose sword slays all things, whose breath is the rain,
whose voice is the thunder, whose teeth are the
lightning, whose frown is the earthquake, whose smile
is the sun, whose ear is the moon, whose eyes are the
stars, whose body is the world! Look upon one soul
of him which he hath sent that ye may worship and
know him!</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer raised the jewelled hand above his
shoulder as the man ceased. From out the medley of
colours to the unaccustomed native eyes grew slowly
the form and face of a white man as strangely clothed as
<pb n="234"/><anchor id="Pg234"/>
Eyes-in-the-hands, covered with amulets and charms
upon his breast. For four minutes by his wrist-watch,
zu Pfeiffer sat silent and as frozen as his sergeants; then
secretly he pulled a string.</p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> grunted Yabolo and MYalu involuntarily,
for before them appeared even, as Sakamata had related,
the two souls of every person present. Stunned
at such a manifestation of magic, they slowly turned
from one to the other. As silently as they had
appeared did the visions vanish.</p>

<p><q>O son of MYana, tell the tale of the possession
of these thy friends and allies,</q> commanded zu
Pfeiffer.</p>

<p>Sakamata obeyed. But as he recited the approximate
number of MYalu&rsquo;s followers, the number of
his oxen and goats, the number of fine tusks and small,
the number of wives, concubines, and children, and
slaves, the eyes of MYalu grew unquiet. Had he
known that he would be required to render an account
he would have computed at half the actual amount,
whereas, in order to impress Sakamata with his importance,
he had exaggerated to almost double what he
had ever possessed. Then as Sakamata proceeded to
perform the same service for Yabolo, relating, by
arrangement with his relative, about one-third of his
possession, MYalu observed in a corner a man making
magic upon a table, a native clerk keeping tally; for
zu Pfeiffer kept an exact record of every chief&rsquo;s alleged
possessions, as given by Sakamata and corroborated&mdash;by
silent consent&mdash;by the said chief, so that when
afterwards any discrepancy with the said list was discovered,
the chief was proven a liar and subject to the
punishment of further confiscation as such, and served
<pb n="235"/><anchor id="Pg235"/>
as well to enhance the reputation for omniscience of
Eyes-in-the-hands.</p>

<p>At the end of the recitals of property, MYalu was
told, not asked, to bow his head to the ground in token
of allegiance. He obeyed in bewilderment which
changed to rage when he was informed that the third
of his property must be rendered to the august being
before one sun&rsquo;s delay; that he was to be ready at a
summons to produce a given number of warriors;
and that his small and only son was immediately to be
placed in the <q>village of sons of chiefs</q> as guaranty of
obedience and good behaviour.</p>

<p>In a mist of fright, anger and awe, he sat motionless.
Sakamata proceeded to relate the doings of Zalu Zako
and those who had remained faithful to him. Zu
Pfeiffer had fairly precise information from spies of
the movements of the Wongolo since the return of
Sergeant Ludwig, who had burned the village of
<corr sic="Yangonyama"><anchor id="E32"/><ref
target="e32">Yagonyana</ref></corr>,
but shortage of men and the serious
disadvantage of traversing and fighting in the forest
had prevented him from sending another punitive
expedition. Also had he heard of a white man who had
passed through the country. Sakamata, native-like,
eager to placate, asserted that he had actually seen the
white man who was called Moonspirit, and from the
same motive, ever wishing to flatter, announced positively
that he had no magic at all, was dark and small
and a trader, the only kind of white man other than
the military at Ingonya of whom Sakamata had ever
seen.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer stroked his left moustache and reflected.
He had at first thought that the man might possibly
be Saunders, a trader who was in his pay, but now
<pb n="236"/><anchor id="Pg236"/>
decided that he was probably some new trader or
hunter from the Tanganyika district. He instructed
Sakamata that he was to send a messenger to this white
man and command him to come to him immediately.
Then waving the imperious jewelled hand, he dismissed
them. But noticing the sullen countenance of
MYalu, he drew Sergeant Schultz&rsquo;s attention, ordering
him to mark the man and if the tax was not forthcoming
quickly, to have him given fifty lashes. Silently
Schultz saluted.</p>

<p>So it was that MYalu, sulky, smouldering with anger
against Sakamata, for he felt that he had been betrayed
into a trap, followed Yabolo out into the sun. Not
only had he not gotten back his ivory left in the village,
but he was ordered to pay much more than he actually
possessed.</p>

<p>But when he had descended the hill to the guest
house he came to the weeping and wailing of his
people, who informed him that Bakuma had been taken
away by three of the demon keepers of the coughing
monsters.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD23" type="chapter">
<pb n="237"/><anchor id="Pg237"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 23</hi>
</head>

<p>Upon the site of Birnier&rsquo;s old camp in the forest
was a high palisade built from tree to tree.
Inside of the gate beside a small conical hut burned
the sacred fires tended by Mungongo; before a green
canvas tent stood the new idol, which differed from
the original in having a better perspective and proportion
of features and body, yet lacked the master
touch of expression given by the subconscious fingers
of the native artist.</p>

<p>Against the wall were stacked uniform cases to make
a table, upon which were a hand-mirror and toilet
articles; above a photograph of Lucille was pinned
upon the canvas. Upon the camp bed, screened by a
mosquito net, lay the new King-God, Moonspirit,
the magic book in his hands.</p><lb/>

<p><q>Kings, princes, monarchs, and magistrates seem
to be most happy, but look into their estate; you shall
find them to be most cumbered with cares, in perpetual
fear, agony, suspicion, jealousy: that as he (Valer. i. 7,
c. 3) saith of a crown, if they but knew the discontents
that accompany it, they would not stoop to pick it up.
Quem mihi regem dabis (saith Chrysostom) non curis
plenum?</q></p><lb/>

<p>The Incarnation of the Unmentionable One smiled,
<pb n="238"/><anchor id="Pg238"/>
put down the book and glanced across at the photograph.</p>

<p><q>And yet they still talk of the advantages of a
monarchy!</q> he commented.</p>

<p>The original plan concocted with Marufa and Zalu
Zako in the forest when making the new idol was that
Birnier should become chief witch-doctor and Zalu
Zako be anointed King-God, with Marufa as the power
behind the throne. Although Zalu Zako desired to
escape the yoke, his protest was enfeebled by the sense
of fatality, and had been utterly squashed by the
promise of Marufa, at Birnier&rsquo;s suggestion, that the sex
tabu would be lifted from the godhead. But the
negligence of Marufa in allowing the white man to
carry the idol, arranged with the idea of investing
Moonspirit with greater prestige according to the
prophecies already announced by Tarum, had permitted
Bakahenzie to make his <hi rend="font-style: italic">coup
d&rsquo;&eacute;tat</hi>&mdash;thrust the
godhood upon the white and recover his own position.</p>

<p>Birnier in truth had little option of refusal as well
as little time for reflection upon a situation the
possibility of which had not occurred to him; for
Marufa was completely out-man&oelig;uvred by his rival,
and the certainty of escape from his doom offered by
Bakahenzie revived the image of Bakuma in Zalu Zako
and bought his partisanship instantly.</p>

<p>With Napoleonic swiftness to grasp the advantages
gained Bakahenzie drove the lay chiefs from the
sacred presence, which he surrounded by a bodyguard
of the awed brethren; expelled the household from
Zalu Zako&rsquo;s compound and hustled the incarnation,
bearing the new god, into holy isolation.</p>

<p>Bewildered by the rapidity of the moves Marufa and
<pb n="239"/><anchor id="Pg239"/>
Zalu Zako were separated from Moonspirit. In the
general confusion, not knowing exactly what was
happening, Birnier complied with what he believed to
be the regulations regarding gods. But when he
perceived that he was about to be left alone he clutched
Mungongo and refused to part with him. Bakahenzie,
compelled to avoid any delay before consolidating his
position, instantly shut up Mungongo in the same web
by declaring him the Keeper of the Sacred Fires and so
disposed of any agent outside the tabu or craft. As
soon as this was accomplished and a dance to celebrate
the lighting of the new fires commanded, the wily
chief witch-doctor approached Marufa who, realizing
that he was hopelessly outwitted, was only too eager
to make the best terms possible.</p>

<p>Birnier had known that the King-God was never
allowed to be seen by the populace except at the
Harvest Festival, yet he accepted his isolation
philosophically, lured by the expectation of the
secrets he was about to learn, although his curiosity
led sometimes to the vision of a god peeping through a
fence.</p>

<p>While the drums summoning the council of chiefs
and wizards were muttering through the moist air, to
Birnier, squatting on the floor of Zalu Zako&rsquo;s hut with
Mungongo beside him, came Bakahenzie to instruct
him in his r&ocirc;le. To whet his curiosity still more he
learned that from the moment of appearance in the
gate of the sacred enclosure for the ceremony of the
lighting of the royal fires, every movement of body
and speech was regulated as rigidly as the etiquette of
the Court of Spain. At a signal from the chief
witch-doctor was the King-God to leave the hut and
<pb n="240"/><anchor id="Pg240"/>
appear from behind the idol; with arms in a certain
position was he to approach and squat at an exact spot.
To Mungongo was given charge of the two fire sticks,
newly consecrated.</p>

<p>As the chief witch-doctor retired the chanting
began. Interested to know what was about to happen
Birnier obeyed in the spirit of a game. So in the
warm darkness they squatted, these two, listening to
the chanting, cries and groans to the accompaniment
of the drums and lyres and the perpetual twitter of the
forest. At last came a violent howl from Bakahenzie
which Mungongo declared was their cue.</p>

<p>Around the circle of the fence to avoid the eyes of
the audience ran Mungongo to the temporary Place
of Fires. Feeling as if he were once more playing in
an amateur dramatic club, Birnier stalked with
portentous dignity from the hut, past the idol, and
took his seat upon the enchanted place. Without the
palisade and within another squatted in correct order
the lines of wizards and chiefs, Zalu Zako retaining,
rather by prestige of his former holiness and indecision
as to what his status really was, his position at their
head.</p>

<p>Upon his haunches before a large calabash upon a fire
Bakahenzie finished the mumbling of incantations over
the sacred ingredients, and leaping to his feet began a
wild dance to the throb of the drums and the diaphragmatic
chorus of the assembled cult.&hellip; Swifter
and swifter spun the chief witch-doctor. The glow of
the fire tinted his whirling bronze body with flecks
of green and red as he gyrated in and out of the shadows.
Suddenly he threw a handful of herbs upon the fire
which was immediately enveloped in a cloud of smoke,
<pb n="241"/><anchor id="Pg241"/>
into which with a screech Bakahenzie disappeared.&hellip;
The drums and grunting ceased. Then
in the swirling column of blue appeared his figure
holding something in his hands. To the wild outburst
of drums and groans he sprang towards the
King-God elect and anointed his breast and shoulders
with a pungent compound, and leaped away into
another dance, while Mungongo plied the two fire
sticks. When the spark was blown upon the dry
tinder and the first flame flickered Bakahenzie dropped
flat before the gate as from the wizards went up the
great shout:</p>

<p><q>The fire is lighted!</q></p>

<p>And from the mass of warriors and folk confined to
their huts behind the outer palisade the phrase was
echoed in a mighty wail, startling monkeys and parrots
into as wild an acclamation of the new King-God.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie, rising to his haunches, began a chant in
honour of the new King, a chant based upon the song
composed by Marufa and repeated on the phonograph,
but developing even stranger merits and attributes.
Until the first glimmer of dawn through the forest
roof squatted Birnier, as motionless as etiquette
demanded, listening to the strange psalm of praise
with avid interest and observation.</p>

<p>Suddenly, amid a furious clamour of the drums,
Bakahenzie, Marufa, and one other of the inner cult
of the five who had not deserted, led the body of the
doctors in a rush into the sacred enclosure, seized upon
the startled King and hustled him to the base of the
idol where, yielding to the whispered instructions of
Marufa, he took the idol once more upon his shoulders
and guided by Bakahenzie, walked out of the gate and
<pb n="242"/><anchor id="Pg242"/>
through the village to the yelling and screaming of the
wizards, some of whom, according to precedent, ran
about screeching and rattling hut doors, pulling
thatches and howling ferociously in search of any
sacrilegious peeper.</p>

<p>As he tramped on with his load Marufa yelled in his
ear that he must carry the Burden of the World no
matter what happened to him, for if he let the idol
fall then would he be killed upon the spot to save the
sky from falling too. Wondering what this meant and
where he was going, the cut of thongs upon his legs
surprised him into a halt. Immediately a terrific cry
went up:</p>

<p><q>The Bearer of the World stumbles! Aie!
Aieeeeeeeee!</q></p>

<p>Despite the furious flogging the intellectual interest
in this strange conception distracted his mind from
the pain of the blows; also his bare back was protected
by the idol and his leggings and trousers deadened the
lashes. A moment more he hesitated. But he was
unarmed and had voluntarily taken on the adventure,
so he would see it through. As he broke into a
shuffling run, for the idol fortunately was lighter than
the previous one and he was a more powerful man
than Kawa Kendi, another howl of joy and relief
echoed throughout the village.</p>

<p>So along the old forest trail he travelled as fast as
he could, assisted slightly by wizards&rsquo; hands as he
crawled over clumps of undergrowth. The intensity
of the whipping had decreased as soon as they were
out of the village but throughout an occasional
vicious whack testified to the presence of some devout
doctor. Thus it was that the white King-God came
<pb n="243"/><anchor id="Pg243"/>
to his throne and sat in state upon his bed to smile
at the reflections of a melancholic philosopher.</p>

<p>So far so good, reflected Birnier, although the
enforced isolation and strict curtailment of his actions
had already begun to be irksome; yet to attain so
difficult a goal sacrifice must be borne, he argued
philosophically.</p>

<p>The royal larder, he noticed with thankfulness, was
kept well stocked. Every day appeared a slave who
left just within the entrance chickens, bananas, milk
and fresh water, and sometimes a young goat. All
such provisions which he had happened to take into
the forest with him and so had escaped MYalu&rsquo;s
marauding hands had been placed in his tent with
other cases, as containing no man knew what mighty
magic.</p>

<p>For three days he had been left utterly alone.
Sounds of drums and chanting from the distant
village had reached them on the still air, but what
they were doing he could not discover. No layman
was allowed to come near the sacred enclosure. While
he strolled, taking a smoke and constitutional around
and around his <q>pen,</q> as he put it, several of the lesser
wizards appeared and stood at a distance from the
gate to stare at him. When addressed they made no
reply. On the second occasion he began to be irritated,
but he kept his temper and went to cover in his tent,
muttering: <q>Why the devil don&rsquo;t they bring me some
buns?</q></p>

<p>On the fourth day patience began to fray. He had
no notion of knowing how long this quarantine was
going to last. He was on the point of going to find out,
but Mungongo pleaded so earnestly that they would
<pb n="244"/><anchor id="Pg244"/>
instantly be killed if they did, that he desisted. So
Birnier retired to the tent to seek consolation from a
record of Lucille&rsquo;s voice.</p>

<p>Birnier attempted to cross-examine Mungongo to
find out what was the object of this isolation, but
beyond the fact that strangers were never permitted
to behold the King-God, even lay natives, without
special magic, which was only made once a year at the
Harvest Festival, lest evil be made upon his person and
so endanger the world, Mungongo did not know;
merely, that so it was. What power over the head
witch-doctor the King really had, Mungongo had no
notion. The King-God was the most powerful
magician known, asserted Mungongo. Did he not
make rain and bear the world upon his shoulders?
When Birnier unwisely denied this feat, Mungongo
looked pained and began a remark, but balked before
the name Moonspirit to ask the name of Birnier&rsquo;s
father.</p>

<p>At the mental image conjured up of a handsome
white-haired planter and ex-owner of many slaves
Birnier smiled, but he knew the tabu regarding the
ban upon the names of the dead and that he, presumably,
having ascended into the divine plane, was
therefore classed with the departed. He recollected
that the old man, who belonged to a cadet branch of a
royalist family, had been called <q>le Marquis,</q> of which
he was excessively proud. Birnier translated into the
dialect the nearest possible rendition of the title:
The Lord-of-many-Lands.</p>

<p><q>The son of the Lord-of-many-Lands,</q> continued
Mungongo satisfied, <q>doth but tickle the feet of his
slave.</q></p>
<pb n="245"/><anchor id="Pg245"/>

<p>On the fifth afternoon, while the god was engrossed
in a cure for love madness which, he reflected, might
be of service to zu Pfeiffer, came a voice without
crying:</p>

<p><q>The son of Maliko would speak with the Lord, the
Bearer of the World!</q></p>

<p>Birnier glanced across at the photograph of Lucille.</p>

<p><q>Some job I&rsquo;ve gotten!</q> he remarked as he rose.
In the gate sat Bakahenzie. Birnier was conscious of
an idiotic impulse to rush forward to greet him as an
old and long lost friend. But remembering the
dignity of his godhood he remained in the tent
doorway, bidding the chief witch-doctor to advance.</p>

<p>Birnier retired backwards and sat beneath the net, for
the mosquitoes were as thick as they are on the bayou
Barataria. Mungongo, possibly to prove his erudition,
sat upon one of the cases containing much magic, at
which Bakahenzie from the floor in the doorway looked
askance. Birnier was keenly anxious to know what was
happening regarding the fortunes of the tribe, hoping
that with the restoration of the Unmentionable One
that they would return to their allegiance. According
to etiquette he remained silent, waiting for Bakahenzie
to open the conversation, until, realizing that he was a
god and that the chief witch-doctor was doing the
same thing, reflected swiftly and desiring to make an
impression, repeated Bakahenzie&rsquo;s mystic phrase which
he had overheard whilst hiding in the jungle previous
to the d&eacute;nouement:</p>

<p><q>That which is and must be, shall be!</q> Bakahenzie
grunted his acknowledgment of the profundity of the
statement. <q>He who would trap the leopard must
needs dig the pit!</q> Another uncompromising silence
<pb n="246"/><anchor id="Pg246"/>
urged Birnier to force the pace a little: <q>O son of
Maliko, what say the omens and the signs of the evil
one, Eyes-in-the-hands?</q></p>

<p><q>When shall the Unmentionable One return unto
the Place of Kings?</q> demanded Bakahenzie.</p>

<p><q>The Holy One returneth not unto the place
appointed until that which defileth is removed,</q>
retorted Birnier.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie took snuff and appeared to consider.
Then he glanced around the tent as if in search of
something.</p>

<p><q>When will the voice of Tarum speak through the
pod of the soul?</q></p>

<p>Mungongo looked expectant and stood up. But
Birnier ignored him.</p>

<p><q>The fruit doth not fall until it be ripe. He would
know what hath been done by his slaves for the baiting
of the pit for the unclean one.</q></p>

<p><q>Would the magician that cometh from the sea
make pretence that an elephant is a mouse?</q> inquired
Bakahenzie.</p>

<p>For a moment Birnier was perplexed; then he
realized that the chief witch-doctor inferred that he,
as King-God, mocked his priest by pretending that he
did not know all things.</p>

<p><q>Doth the chief witch-doctor make magic for the
curing of the scratch of a girl of the hut thatch?</q> he
retorted. <q>Lest thy heart wither like unto a fallen
leaf, know then that the soul of Tarum hath made
words for the return of the Unmentionable One to
the Place of Kings, but that his children may not be
as the dogs of the village who are driven, he wills that
you prepare the pit for the trapping of the defiled
<pb n="247"/><anchor id="Pg247"/>
one.</q> Bakahenzie&rsquo;s eyes stolidly regarded the tent
wall. <q>O son of Maliko, hast thou sent forth the
sound of the drum throughout the land that the
children may know of the Coming?</q></p>

<p><q>When will the voice of Tarum speak through the
pod of the soul?</q> demanded Bakahenzie insistently.</p>

<p>Birnier sat motionless in the native manner.
Irritated by this childish tenacity to apparently a fixed
idea, he yielded to an impulse which was almost a
weakness.</p>

<p><q>O son of Maliko,</q> said he, <q>thou art a mighty
magician!</q> Bakahenzie grunted modest assent.
<q>Even as I am.</q> Another grunt. <q>Give unto me
thine ears and thine eyes that I may reveal unto thee
that which is known to the mightiest of magicians.</q>
Commanding the delighted Mungongo to bring out
the phonograph, he continued: <q>Thou hast heard
of the mighty doings of the unclean devourer of men,
Eyes-in-the-hands. I have magic the like of which
man hath never seen. Is it not so?</q></p>

<p><q>Ough!</q></p>

<p><q>Yet will the son of the Lord-of-many-Lands make
thee to see that which is, is not!</q></p>

<p><q>That which is, is not,</q> repeated Bakahenzie, whose
professional mind was pleased with the phrase.</p>

<p>In the desire to explain rationally the mystery
of a phonograph and despairing of any attempt
to describe the laws of vibration, Birnier sought
for a likely simile. Encouraged by the almost imperceptible
fact that he had awakened Bakahenzie&rsquo;s
visible interest, he plunged on: <q>Within this piece of
tree is there nought but many pieces of iron such as thy
spears are made of. Thou knowest that there are
<pb n="248"/><anchor id="Pg248"/>
places by the river and in the rocks where a man may
speak and that his words will be returned to him. Is
it not so?</q></p>

<p><q>They are white words, O son of the Lord-of-many-Lands!</q>
returned Bakahenzie. <q>For the spirits
of the river and the rocks mock the voices of those
who have not eaten of the Sacred Banana</q> (the uninitiated).</p>

<p><q>But they mock thy voice as well,</q> protested Birnier.</p>

<p><q>Are there not goats in ghostland who bleat at the
wizard and the peasant?</q></p>

<p><q>By the Lord!</q> murmured Birnier, although the
mask of his face did not change. <q rend="post: none">Ghostland is full
of goats if one were to credit some of the most modern
witch-doctors! Still demonstration &hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>Thou seest, fellow magician,</q> he continued, <q>the
pod of the soul of mighty Tarum, his ear like unto an
elephant, his colour like unto a lion!</q> Birnier got
out of the mosquito net and knelt beside the phonograph
in front of Bakahenzie. Taking off the trumpet
and cylinder carrier he opened up the inside, revealing
the clockwork motor, wound it up, stopped it and
released it. <q>Thine eyes see that my words are
white. These things are but as pieces of metal of thy
spears. Is it not so?</q></p>

<p><q>Ough!</q></p>

<p>Birnier closed the machine, adjusted the trumpet
and put on the cylinder of Marufa&rsquo;s record.</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Aie! Aiee! I am the spirit of Kintu!</l>
  <l>Aie! Aiee! I am he who first was!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>chanted the machine.</p>

<p>Birnier, noticing that the desired astonishment was
<pb n="249"/><anchor id="Pg249"/>
registered by an almost impalpable start, stopped the
machine and changed the record.</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;Rejoice, O my children, for he that is bidden shall come!</l>
  <l>Rejoice, O ye warriors, for he that shall lead you shall come!</l>
  <l>Rejoice, O ye wizards, for he that is greater than ye shall come!</l>
  <l>Rejoice, O ye women, for he that fertilizes shall come!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>Birnier allowed the machine to run through the
chant until the end:</p>

<lg rend="margin-left: 2" type="chant">
  <l>&ldquo;He shall come forth bearing that which ye seek!</l>
  <l>Hear ye, my people, and give voice to my word!&rdquo;</l>
</lg>

<p>The machine whirred and stopped. Birnier turned
to Bakahenzie.</p>

<p><q>Thou hast seen, O my brother magician, that my
words are white?</q></p>

<p><q>Ough!</q> assented Bakahenzie.</p>

<p><q>Thou hast seen, O my brother magician, that at
the will of my finger upon that which is made but of
spear-heads that the voice of Tarum hath spoken, the
voice which is but the mocking voice of Marufa amid
the trees of the forest?</q></p>

<p><q>Ough!</q></p>

<p><q>Dost thou not know that he who knows the ways
of rocks, who can make pieces of spear into that which
will say and do that which he wills, is a greater magician
than he who must needs go unto the rocks to be
mocked?</q></p>

<p><q>Thou art the greatest of magicians, O son of the
<pb n="250"/><anchor id="Pg250"/>
Lord-of-many-Lands,</q> responded Bakahenzie in a
burst of eloquence. <q>For thou hast entrapped the
spirits of rocks and spears to do thy bidding.</q></p>

<p><q>O God!</q> sighed the professor, <q>what is the use
of language?</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD24" type="chapter">
<pb n="251"/><anchor id="Pg251"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 24</hi>
</head>

<p>A favourite panacea for the results of a stupid
action is the sentiment of martyrdom. When
MYalu persisted in bitter reproaches to Yabolo and
Sakamata the first retorted that the punishment was
the result of having committed the sacrilege of
kidnapping the sacred Bride of the Banana. Then
MYalu considered that not only had he been trapped
by one of his own people whom he had deserted, but
to add insult to injury he felt he was not understood.
Neither Yabolo nor Sakamata, as Bakahenzie, could
comprehend a chief and a warrior making such a fuss
over a girl. That the confiscation of MYalu&rsquo;s property
was an insult they both agreed, but biassed by both
fear of Eyes-in-the-hands and their own interests, they
were disposed to pretend that after all such a small
matter as the abduction of a girl could be overlooked
when committed by the follower of such a powerful
god and magician, as expedience is so often the father
of a dispensation. Yet nevertheless in Yabolo, if not
in Sakamata, whose hatred of the tribal craft was deep
in ratio to the degeneracy of his native code, the
outrage upon Bakuma as the Bride of the Banana,
while an act of dangerous sacrilege when performed
by a Wongolo, violated the half suppressed traditions
and kindled a spark of bitter resentment ready to flare
up against Eyes-in-the-hands or Sakamata; but being
a diplomatist, he concealed that anger, even from
himself to a certain degree.</p>
<pb n="252"/><anchor id="Pg252"/>

<p>Upon MYalu&rsquo;s arrival in the guest-house to find that
Bakuma had been taken, his passion had nearly led to
his instant destruction, for he had desired to run amok
among the grinning askaris. Afterwards, when the
efforts of his friends and the hungry points of bayonets
had cooled his ardour, he had wanted to rush straight
to Eyes-in-the-hands who, according to Sakamata
employed as master of ceremony at the daily audiences,
would instantly restore Bakuma to him and visit a
terrible punishment upon the evil-doer. But the
august presence could not be approached so casually:
petition must be made in orthodox form and the royal
pleasure awaited meekly.</p>

<p>According to the words of the Son-of-the-Earthquake,
as zu Pfeiffer was officially designated by his
men, who placed the actual name under the tabu in
token of the acceptance of the magic purple, came a
guard to take away MYalu&rsquo;s first-born as hostage to
the village of the sons of chiefs. Seething with red
rage MYalu mutely followed Yabolo to the place
appointed for their housing. Then on the following
afternoon at the time of audience MYalu waited in the
broiling heat for three hand&rsquo;s-spans of the sun without
being summoned to the green temple. And thus it
was for three days.</p>

<p>But upon the fourth, when MYalu squatted in the
general hut in company with Yabolo, Sakamata, and
other renegade chiefs, smouldering with bitter resentment,
came the pulse of a distant drum, the furious
tattoo and long pause, tattoo and long pause, which
accompanies the mighty shout at the coronation of a
new King-God, <q>The Fire is lighted!</q> news that
had throbbed from that point within the forest
<pb n="253"/><anchor id="Pg253"/>
from village to village to the slopes of the Gamballagalla
and to the Wamungo country. The perceptible
effect upon that circle of bronze figures was a scarcely
audible grunt, yet nevertheless the message was like
unto a live ember dropped in the dry grass of the cattle
country.</p>

<p>That morning one of the renegade chiefs had brought
in two others to make their allegiance and received as
reward for his fidelity a remittance of one-third of the
tax levy upon his property, a policy adopted by zu
Pfeiffer calculated to encourage the recruiting of his
followers by establishing a reputation for lavish
generosity to those who obeyed him, in contrast to
his merciless severity to the recalcitrant ones.</p>

<p>An hour later MYalu was summoned from the
sweating throng squatted before the line of demon
keepers through the giant ebon guards to audience with
the Son-of-the-Earthquake. At the entrance as bidden
he knelt, for he knew that he would be compelled did
he refuse. A white flame was in his heart, but yet
the magnificence of the son of the World Trembler and
his satellites, the terrible ghosts of the distant white
god, with amulets and charms upon his breast, had awed
and subdued MYalu. Then came the voice of Sakamata
relating that the chief MYalu, son of MBusa,
made complaint to the Son-of-the-Earthquake that
his slaves, the keepers of the coughing demons, had
taken a girl named Bakuma, daughter of Bakala, and
that he craved restitution of his property. While this
was being translated by the corporal interpreter,
MYalu watched the magic flame in the mouth of
Eyes-in-the-hands, marvelling greatly at the smoke
which emerged. Then said the interpreter:</p>
<pb n="254"/><anchor id="Pg254"/>

<p><q>The son of the Lord-of-the-World, the Earthquake,
the World Trembler who eats up whom he
pleases, whose eyes see all things, whose sword slays
all things, whose breath is the rain, whose voice is the
thunder, whose teeth are the lightning, whose frown
is the earthquake, whose smile is the sun, whose ear is
the moon, whose eyes are the stars, whose body is the
world, saith that when the son of MBusa (MYalu)
bringeth three chiefs of the same rank to sit at the Feet
then shall the daughter of Bakala return unto him,
but in the meantime shall her girdle remain untied.
He hath spoken!</q></p>

<p>As he finished zu Pfeiffer made the signal of dismissal
with his jewelled hand, but MYalu with the throb of
that distant drum in his ears, cried out in protest,
saying:</p>

<p><q>The words of the Son-of-the-Earthquake are like
unto spears made of grass!</q></p>

<p>The interpreter boggled at the translation of the
sentence. Zu Pfeiffer saw a ripple of insubordination.
He rapped out an order to have the man taken away
and given fifty lashes. Instantly the guards surrounded
MYalu, who submitted in sudden misgiving,
and led him away to receive the punishment.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer gave orders that the girl Bakuma should
be found and called the next case, Kalomato the
elderly chief who had had all his property sequestered
until he should deliver his eldest son as hostage. He
was a slight withered old man with a white tuft of
beard and at the hands of the askaris, after considerable
endurance, had screamed his submission. Now he
hobbled into zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s presence with the aid of a
stick. Pompously the interpreter recited the list of
<pb n="255"/><anchor id="Pg255"/>
the titles of the august one, and then dwelt upon the
wondrous benefits to be obtained at the magic jewelled
hands, and demanded that the old chief <q>eat the dust</q>
and obey the royal mandate.</p>

<p>But the sharp eyes gazed steadily from their wrinkled
sockets with a curious gleam in them as he mumbled
that <q>his soul had wandered</q> (he had dreamed) <q rend="post: none">and
had met the spirit of Tarum, who had forbidden him
to obey the white god.<corr sic="&nbsp;"><anchor id="E29"/><ref
target="e29">&rdquo;</ref></corr></q></p>

<p><q>The shenzie</q> (savage&mdash;used contemptuously)
<q>longs for more fire for his paws, O Bwana,</q> translated
the interpreter into Kiswahili.</p>

<p><q>What does he say?</q> demanded zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p><q>He says, Bwana, that he hath dreamed that his
god hath told him that he must not obey you. Indio,
Bwana.</q></p>

<p><q>Tell him that I slew his god, as every man knows.</q></p>

<p><q>The Son-of-the-Earthquake bids thee to know that
he hath eaten up thy god as he eateth up thy warriors
when his wrath is aroused. Eat dust that thy beard
grow yet longer; stretch thy tongue and thou shalt
be eaten entirely and all that is thine!</q></p>

<p><q>The Fire is lighted,</q> mumbled the old man.</p>

<p><q>What does he say?</q> demanded zu Pfeiffer sharply.</p>

<p><q>He attempts to make magic against thee, Bwana,</q>
replied the interpreter who knew not the meaning of
the phrase.</p>

<p><q>Take away the animal,</q> commanded zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p>The old man was accordingly led out to the further
attentions of the soldiery. But during that afternoon
zu Pfeiffer became conscious of a subtle air of defiance,
a restlessness and exchanging of glances, so that the
demon which Bakunjala had once seen so vividly came
<pb n="256"/><anchor id="Pg256"/>
back to roost somewhere beneath the immaculate
uniform.</p>

<p>Neither he nor his sergeants nor their men could
speak the Wongolo tongue fluently, so that for interpreter
he was compelled to employ one of the corporals.
To employ any newly subjected race or tribe as
soldiers or in any responsible capacity is unwise, for
ties of blood are liable to lead to treachery; to trust
to the idiosyncrasies and personal values of any native
interpreter is equally impolitic. Zu Pfeiffer and his
party were as unaware of the meaning of the phrases
exchanged as they were of the message in the throbbing
of that distant drum. Between the conqueror and
the subjected tribe was a wall denser than any steel;
the same wall of tabu of the craft that Birnier was
finding so difficult to penetrate.</p>

<p>Every attempt to persuade any of the witch-doctors
to disclose the secrets of their craft through the
interpreter was doomed to failure; even had zu
Pfeiffer been able to speak the dialect as well as Birnier
he would never have accomplished it. Yet he tried
the impossible. The answer was invariably a mask of
ox-like stupidity or the retort that he, being a mighty
magician, must needs know that he did but <q>tickle their
feet</q>! At length, irritated by this persistence, he
had Sakamata put to the torture and had for his pains
a story in which the idol as the first man was the father
of the tribe whom the people believed to have been
eaten up literally, so that the conqueror had become
the father of the people, having the idol inside him,
and the chance that the tale had a faint resemblance to
an account by a Frenchman of the superstitions of a
West African tribe, convinced him. Implicitly he
<pb n="257"/><anchor id="Pg257"/>
believed the ingenious yarn invented by a wily witch-doctor
to save his hide and the perquisites of his job
by placating the white man, the trap into which most
white chroniclers have fallen. This conviction, which
flattered his sagacity and lulled any suspicions,
strengthened his arm in the delivering of punishment
and reward.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD25" type="chapter">
<pb n="258"/><anchor id="Pg258"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 25</hi>
</head>

<p>In the camp of Bakahenzie was the low mutter of the
drums by day and night. The village had straggled
farther through the forest in each direction save that
of the sacred enclosure. Already were some five
hundred warriors there and more were pouring in
every day. Busy were Bakahenzie and wizards, great
and small, in the preparing of amulets of the hearts
of lions, livers of leopards and galls of birds, and the
brewing of potent decoctions to be smeared with parrot
feathers upon the warriors old and young against the
evil eye and the spirits of the night. And dispensed
by Bakahenzie and Marufa, from whom had come the
original idea, was a special and rather expensive charm
against the coughing monsters, which was made by,
and invested with, the magic of the King-God himself,
a can key. That morning had there been a special
meeting of the craft and the chiefs before the sacred
enclosure, where they had looked upon the sacred form
of the King-God and heard the magic elephant&rsquo;s ear
give them instructions and a prophecy. Around and
about a hundred fires, flickering mystically in the moist
cavern of the forest, shuffled and chanted the warriors
invoking the aid of Tarum, the spirit of their ancestors.</p>

<p>On the threshold of his hut squatted a sullen Zalu
Zako. He had discovered that he had escaped from
the river bearing him to the pool of celibacy to find
that the bird had been captured by another. Although
<pb n="259"/><anchor id="Pg259"/>
he had known that before attaining his desire he would
have had to extricate Bakuma from the net of the tabu,
yet, lover-like and human, that task unconsidered had
seemed as easy as stalking a buck in a wood. But the
joy of his own release had been dissipated as a cloud
of dust by a shower by the news of MYalu&rsquo;s abduction
of the girl and his desertion. Zalu Zako was so
obsessed by chagrin at this wholly unexpected appearance
of a rival that he was inclined to regret that he
had ever thought of the move by which he could
escape his late doom and rescue Bakuma at the same
time. The illusion of nearness to the desired object
had served naturally to whet his appetite; the balked
love motive dominated him almost to the exclusion
of political affairs. What his official status was now
that all precedent had been broken Bakahenzie did
not know and had not decided, and Zalu Zako cared
less.</p>

<p>Though his faith in most of the tribal theology was
unshaken, he did not believe in the sanctity, or the
necessity, of the marriage of the Bride of the Banana,
because he had a defensive complex of desire for her
that inhibited that belief. Towards MYalu, Zalu
Zako&rsquo;s natural reaction was revenge. The matter
was how to accomplish that end. To reveal to Bakahenzie
that he was the lover of Bakuma would be
tantamount to admitting sacrilege in having a passion
for the Bride of the Banana.</p>

<p>As Zalu Zako was unable to get at the person of
his rival the most logical method to his mind was by
witchcraft. To obtain some relics of the body of
MYalu proved easy, as his wives and slaves being forced
to flee, had been unable to burn the deserted hut, thus
<pb n="260"/><anchor id="Pg260"/>
leaving in the customary place in the thatch some of the
hair and nail clippings. Also to find an excuse for the
cursing of MYalu was still easier. So at a meeting
of the chiefs he rivalled Bakahenzie in denunciation
of the absconding chief, insisted that a mighty magic
be made against him and produced the necessary
corporeal parts upon which to work. So it was that
Bakahenzie and Marufa, a quiet watchful Marufa,
brewed the magic brew and condemned MYalu by
the proxy of his nail clippings to die, a process
that took root in a very firm conviction in the mind
of Zalu Zako and the others that die MYalu would.</p>

<p>After this satisfaction of the first fierce instinct
Zalu Zako was more at liberty to consider other matters,
which resulted in an effort to quicken the collective
will to recover the tribe&rsquo;s country and possessions,
symbolised in Zalu Zako&rsquo;s mind by the delicate figure
of Bakuma.</p>

<p>The ceremony of the lighting of the new fires he
had attended perfunctorily. To have regret or pity
for the white man, Moonspirit who had taken over his
doom, never occurred to Zalu Zako, for to him as to
Bakahenzie Moonspirit was a mighty magician who,
if competent to effect the magic he had already
displayed, was capable of looking after himself;
moreover, as he had recalled the Unmentionable
One, he stood as the incarnation of the tribe, the god,
therefore beyond human consideration.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie&rsquo;s chief regard was, of course, to unify
the tribe once more and to rouse those who had
submitted to Eyes-in-the-hands to rebellion, which
was but a projection of his desire, as that of all
patriots, to consolidate his own position and to regain
<pb n="261"/><anchor id="Pg261"/>
his lost prestige. He had had no need to command that
the news be sent abroad. At the ceremony of the
Lighting of the Fires the drum notes had been picked
up by the nearest village and sent ricocheting across
the length and breadth of the country, rippling through
the Court of the Son-of-the-Earthquake.</p>

<p>Bakahenzie&rsquo;s confidence had increased tenfold since,
by his clever coup, he had locked up the white magician
in the godhead. He believed that Moonspirit was
the mightiest magician the world had ever seen, a
demi-god; for had he, Bakahenzie, not seen these
wondrous miracles with his own eyes? Had not he,
Bakahenzie, captured and tamed this marvellous
power to his own ends?</p>

<p>So absolute was this confidence in the powers of
the white that Bakahenzie was perfectly sincere, as
Mungongo and Bakuma had been, in asserting that
the <q>son of the Lord-of-many-Lands</q> was pleased to
pretend that <q>an elephant was a mouse,</q> that he
<q>tickled their feet.</q> The only doubt raised in his
mind at that interview was whether he could persuade
this powerful being to destroy the usurper <q>out of
hand,</q> as it were, or even whether Moonspirit could
do so; for it was quite reasonable to him to suppose
that even a god, in fighting another god, might have
to do battle for the victory.</p>

<p>Not in spite of, but because of, this firm faith
Bakahenzie took more precautions than ever before
to surround the captured god with the toughest
fibres of the tabu to keep him in isolation. Obviously
such a valuable prize demanded special precautions.
He promulgated an ordinance, in the amplitude of
his regained power, that no lay man nor any wizard
<pb n="262"/><anchor id="Pg262"/>
save the inner cult, whom he dared not forbid, were
to approach within sight of the sacred enclosure.
In the jungle of his mind lurked the fear that the new
god might be seen to leave the sacred ground and thus
render the penalty of death imperative according to
the laws of the tabu upon a god who jeopardised the
tribal welfare as MFunya MPopo had done by his
failure to bring rain. The belief that he could control
a force which he admitted was infinitely greater than
he, and of punishing it if it did not behave, was not
at all inconsistent to the native mind, nor more
illogical than many theological ideas of whites.</p>

<p>At the last interview Bakahenzie had tried to
persuade Birnier to permit him to speak into the mighty
ear of the magic box; in effect an attempt to gain
complete control. But Birnier, when he at length
had realised that Bakahenzie&rsquo;s mental development
was little greater than Mungongo&rsquo;s, and keenly aware
of the isolation to which he was to be subjected, as
well as the purpose in the witch-doctor&rsquo;s mind, had
resolutely refused. Bakahenzie had accepted the
intimation that the god would not work miracles
through any other mouth than that of his incarnation,
and after a long cogitative silence had departed without
further comment.</p>

<p>But of course he came back again next day, as
Birnier had known that he would. Birnier hinted at
the expected initiation into the <q>mysteries</q> of the
craft, particularly of the Festival of the Banana and
the other ceremonies connected with his r&ocirc;le as
King-God. But Bakahenzie&rsquo;s gaze, fixed upon an
object on the toilet table, did not quiver. Birnier
repeated the inquiry more bluntly. Said Bakahenzie:</p>
<pb n="263"/><anchor id="Pg263"/>

<p><q>The fingers of the son of Maliko are hungry to
touch the magic knife of the son of the Lord-of-many-Lands.</q></p>

<p><q>Damn it,</q> muttered Birnier. <q>That&rsquo;s my favourite!</q>
But he handed the razor to Bakahenzie,
saying: <q>Is not the porridge pot free to all brothers?</q>
Gravely Bakahenzie slipped the safety razor into
his loin cloth, mumbled the orthodox adieu and
departed.</p>

<p>Although devoted to Birnier as much as ever,
Mungongo was bound just as much by the articles of
the tabu as any other native; in fact, since his appointment
to the high office of Keeper of the Fires, he was
if possible more terrified by the bogies of their theology
than before. Put one foot out of the sacred ground
he would not, for he was convinced that immediately
he did so, the ghosts of the dead kings would instantly
strangle him. Birnier attempted to persuade him to
get into communication with Marufa, but that wily
gentleman, grieving over the failure of the coup he
had aided Birnier to make, and for the moment
completely under the domination of Bakahenzie,
who, he knew, had him watched every moment of the
day and night, would never approach the Place of the
Unmentionable One. Nor dared Zalu Zako break
the tabu placed by Bakahenzie. To Bakahenzie and
not to Birnier he owed his escape from the dreaded
godhood. One who had released him might quite
reasonably have him back again if annoyed. The few
wizards who came to gaze at the imprisoned god like
children at the Zoo, as Birnier had commented, were
deaf to any remark, instruction, or plea of the Holy
One. So it was that Birnier began to realise that
<pb n="264"/><anchor id="Pg264"/>
the functions of a god were so very purely divine
that he would never be allowed to interfere in human
affairs at all except by grace of the high priest, and
possibly he was not the first god who had found that
out.</p>

<p>This jungle of secrecy and the denial of any active
part in the organising of the tribe began to irritate
Birnier. Yet he perceived clearly enough from his
knowledge of the native mind that a premature
effort to force either confidence or action would
end in disaster. Patience and perseverance alone
would bring success; and the moulding of the
material through forces which already controlled it.
He must play the witch-doctor to the full. Working
upon this hypothesis he determined to control
Bakahenzie through <q>messages</q> from the spirit of
Tarum. The trouble was to find out whether
Bakahenzie would obey him or not and to what
extent.</p>

<p>So in the early hours of one morning Bakahenzie&rsquo;s
watchers in the forest shuddered as they heard more
of the mysterious voices of the Unmentionable One
making wondrous magic within the temple as Mungongo
chanted, at Birnier&rsquo;s prompting, the god&rsquo;s
instructions to his high priest and people. The form
of the chant was not correct as Mungongo&rsquo;s memory
was very unreliable, but as Birnier remarked to the
portrait of Lucille, <q>I don&rsquo;t suppose Maestro Bakahenzie
is such a stylist as he would have the public
suppose.</q> Afterwards, to Mungongo&rsquo;s delight, who
was never tired of any manifestation of Moonspirit&rsquo;s
magic, he put out the light and lay upon his bed within
the temple listening to the voice of Lucille pouring
<pb n="265"/><anchor id="Pg265"/>
out the passion of <q>Mon c&oelig;ur s&rsquo;ouvre &agrave; ta voix,</q> in
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Samson et Delilah</hi>, to the sleepy ears of
the monkeys above the figure of the idol limned against the moon-patterned
roof of the forest.</p>

<p>But scarcely had the moist ultramarine shadows
turned to mauve than the voice of Bakahenzie hailed
the god most punctiliously from without. However
Birnier happened to be sleepy, and the chance of the
early hour presented such an opportunity to gain
prestige that he sent the Keeper of the Fires to inform
the High Priest that the god was not yet up and that
he must needs wait. And wait did Bakahenzie, like
unto a graven image at the gate until the sun was four
hand&rsquo;s-spans above the trees. When Birnier had
breakfasted upon broiled kid, eggs, banana and
weak tea, Bakahenzie was summoned to the august
presence.</p>

<p>Wondering what new idea Bakahenzie had gotten
into his head Birnier solemnly talked the usual preliminaries,
intending to announce in the best manner that
Tarum had a message for the son of Maliko; but to
his astonishment Bakahenzie forestalled him by
demanding to know when the god would speak
again.</p>

<p>When Mungongo had gravely placed the machine
at his feet Birnier set the record. The chant bade
the son of Maliko to summon the wizards and the
warriors of the tribe to the abode of the Unmentionable
One; to send to those who had fallen into
the power of Eyes-in-the-hands instructions that
they were not to reveal by word or deed that the
Unmentionable One had been pleased to return, but
to wait like a wild cat at a fish pool until a signal was
<pb n="266"/><anchor id="Pg266"/>
given through the drums, when they were to smite
swiftly at every keeper of the demons and to flee
immediately to their brethren in the forest; that
they were on no account to kill or wound Eyes-in-the-hands
nor any white man that was his, lest their
powerful ghosts exact a terrible penalty and refuse to
be propitiated; that when these things had been
done would the spirit of Tarum issue further instructions.</p>

<p>In composing this message Bernier had sought to gain
the advantage of a surprise attack and to secure the
massacre of as many of the askaris as possible; to save
zu Pfeiffer and his white sergeants from the fate which
would await them should they fall into the hands of
the Wongolo; to minimise the loss of men which
would occur were the tribe to attempt to face the
guns; afterwards to lure zu Pfeiffer away from his
fortifications and the open country, in order to compel
him to fight in the forest where he could not ascertain
what force was against him; and in the meantime to
slip round and establish the idol in the Place of Kings,
which act would consolidate the moral of the tribe
as well as cut the line of zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s communications
with Ingonya.</p>

<p>As Bakahenzie listened gravely and attentively,
Birnier keenly watched his face. Although the mask
did not quiver, a half suppressed grunt at the end
persuaded him that Bakahenzie was duly impressed,
but he made no comment. After regarding Mungongo
solemnly putting away the machine Bakahenzie
remarked casually:</p>

<p><q>In the village is a messenger from Eyes-in-the-hands
who sends thee greetings.</q></p>
<pb n="267"/><anchor id="Pg267"/>

<p>This was the first news that Birnier had received
since his ascent to the godhood. He had expected
that sooner or later zu Pfeiffer would hear of the
presence of a white man, but he was rather startled
at the inference that zu Pfeiffer knew who he was.
He made no visible sign as he waited. Bakahenzie
took snuff interestedly and continued:</p>

<p><q>Eyes-in-the-hands bids thee to go unto the Place
of Kings to eat the dust before him.</q></p>

<p>Bakahenzie regarded him with keen eyes. Birnier
considered swiftly. From the latter part of the
message he gathered that zu Pfeiffer was not aware
of his identity. His opinion of zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s character
suggested certain psychological possibilities. His policy
was to lure him away from his fort; to destroy
his military judgment. Therefore to cause him at
this juncture to be violently disturbed by a personal
emotion might tend to confuse his mind. Enmity&mdash;fear&mdash;might
equally serve as the lure required. In
spite of committing a breach of native etiquette
Birnier could not resist smiling. He reached for the
<q>Anatomy</q> and as he scribbled two words he said to
Bakahenzie solemnly:</p>

<p><q>O son of Maliko, say unto this man of many
tongues as well as many eyes, &lsquo;that the jackal follows
the lion that he may feed upon his leavings; that
the voice of the hyena is loudest when he eateth
offal.&rsquo; And shall the slave take unto him that
which is mighty magic, such magic that when Eyes-in-the-hands
doth but touch it shall he trumpet like unto
a wounded cow elephant. Bid him to mark that my
words be white!</q></p>

<p>And when Bakahenzie had gone Birnier turned to
<pb n="268"/><anchor id="Pg268"/>
the portrait on the wall and remarked as he indulged
in the luxury of a grin: <q>Say, honey, but if that
doesn&rsquo;t make him mad, I&rsquo;ll&mdash;I&rsquo;ll
eat my own manuscripts!</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD26" type="chapter">
<pb n="269"/><anchor id="Pg269"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 26</hi>
</head>

<p>In a corner of one of the half-completed huts in a
half-completed street of the new village of the
Place of Kings squatted Yabolo and other chiefs.
As Sakamata was up in the fort serving Eyes-in-the-hands
they could talk freely, yet in low tones and with
wary eyes for the interstices of the unfinished wall.
More than one chief had been thrashed but none as
high in rank as MYalu; moreover, those that had
been severely punished had been taken in fair fight or
had attempted to escape, whereas MYalu had done
nothing that they considered to merit punishment.
The growing detestation and hatred smouldering within
all of them against the new ruler had burst into flame
at the first hint of the news vibrating upon the moist
air. Later had come another drum message bidding
them await new words of Tarum, and forty-eight
hours afterwards the messenger sent by zu Pfeiffer to
summon Moonspirit, who squatted in the group,
whispered word for word Birnier&rsquo;s message on the
phonograph, adding further instructions from Bakahenzie
that the signal should be another message upon
the drums: <q>The Fire is lighted.</q></p>

<p>Warm banana wrapped in leaves, which a slave
had brought in, was placed before the chiefs while
the messenger related the gossip of the village in the
forest. Later, while lolling through the mid-day
heat waiting for the time of audience, he produced
<pb n="270"/><anchor id="Pg270"/>
from his loin cloth the magic charm which the son
of the Lord-of-many-Lands, the King-God, had sent
to Eyes-in-the-hands and repeated the prophecy that
he should trumpet like unto a wounded cow elephant,
eliciting many grunts of admiration and awe. Then
he inquired for Sakamata and MYalu, and upon hearing
the account, reported that they were both traitors
and had been condemned to die by the magic of
Bakahenzie and Marufa.</p>

<p>Each and every chief felt that he had been betrayed
by Sakamata. Even Yabolo, his relative, particularly
because his visionary schemes had come to nought,
was against Sakamata. Sakamata had heard the message
of the drums, <q>The Fire is lighted.</q> But of the
details of the return of the Unmentionable One
and of the new King-God he knew nothing, although
every other Wongolo man, woman, and child, knew
it. The terror of the tabu, of the power of the
Unmentionable One, was more overwhelming than
his fear of Eyes-in-the-hands, wizard and ex-member
of the inner cult though he be. The Unmentionable
One had returned, a miracle! In a thousand signs
of birds and beasts, twigs and shadows, Sakamata
saw omens of evil. He knew that he was an outcast,
that his fellows were plotting; that they knew something
that he did not; yet he dared not tell Eyes-in-the-hands
lest he be killed on the instant, not by
Eyes-in-the-hands but by the mystic power of the
Unmentionable One.</p>

<p>Farther down the line, in a small hut, lay MYalu
motionless. His mind was a whirling red spot of
rage and pain, obliterating the image of Bakuma, his
ivory, and everything. From the base of the spine
<pb n="271"/><anchor id="Pg271"/>
to his neck he was criss-crossed with bloody weals
administered with a kiboko (whip of hippopotamus
hide) by one of the black giants who formed the door
guard at the tent of Eyes-in-the-hands. More
stimulating to his anger even than the excessive pain
was the indignity, that he, MYalu, son of MBusa, a
chief, had been flogged like a slave before all men!
Could he have gotten free he would have leaped upon
zu Pfeiffer, god or no, and torn him to pieces with
hands and teeth. But he could scarcely move. Never
had such an act been conceived by MYalu. The
native dignity and reserve was shattered. He lay
upon his belly and glared with the eyes of a maddened
and tortured animal.</p>

<p>The yellow glare in the open doorway was darkened,
but MYalu did not stir. The figure of Yabolo, a
short throwing sword in hand, moved towards him
and squatted down, muttering greetings. MYalu
made no response. Yabolo repeated the message
from the spirit of Tarum.</p>

<p><q>Let thy spear be made sharp, O son of MBusa,
that we may make the jackal who would command the
lion to eat offal!</q> MYalu grunted. <q>The son of
Bayakala saith that it will be soon, so that thou mayest
yet eat of thy defiler ere thou art gone to ghostland.</q>
MYalu turned his head. <q>The son of MTungo and
the son of Maliko,</q> explained the old man, <q>have
made magic upon the parts which thou didst foolishly
leave within thy hut.</q></p>

<p>Again MYalu merely grunted and turned away
his head. But that dread news had quenched the
white flame of anger. The spirits were wroth; even
had they caused him to eat the dust before all men.
<pb n="272"/><anchor id="Pg272"/>
Conviction in the efficacy of the magic for which he
would have bought Marufa to make against Zalu Zako
was as absolute as his faith in the death magic made
against him by the two powerful witch-doctors, and
intensified by the miraculous return of the Unmentionable
One against whom he had committed sacrilege.
He recollected the cry of the Baroto bird on the night
on which he had kidnapped the Bride of the Banana.
The spirit of Tarum was wroth. The mighty new
King-God of the Unmentionable One was about to
eat up all the enemies of the land. MYalu was
convinced that he was doomed; certain that Yabolo
knew that he was doomed; that every man knew that
he was doomed.</p>

<p>For ten minutes the figures, squatting and lying,
remained as motionless as bronzes. Then MYalu
rose to his knees and said calmly: <q>Give me thy
sword, O son of Zingala.</q></p>

<p>Silently Yabolo handed him the sword which
MYalu placed beneath him and laid down again. So
quietly he died.</p>

<p>From the sacred hill blared the harsh cry of the
yellow bird, as the natives called the trumpet, announcing
that the august presence was in audience. But
instead of the usual crowd of immobile figures squatted
almost under the shadow of the pom-pom within the
gate of the fort, sat only the messenger. Sakamata,
knowing that something portended and yet not
exactly what, was so scared that his skinny limbs
quivered as if with an ague. Although he desired to
warn Eyes-in-the-hands in order to save himself, he
dared not attempt to do so lest the august one visit
his anger upon his person; vague ideas of redeeming
<pb n="273"/><anchor id="Pg273"/>
his treachery by delivering Eyes-in-the-hands over
to his countrymen were stoppered by terror of the
wrath of the Unmentionable One.</p>

<p>So it was that the pomp of the Son-of-the-Earthquake
and the glory of the soul of the World-Trembler
with many charms upon his breast was reserved for the
humble messenger who entered escorted by Sakamata.
After bowing in the prescribed manner the messenger
squatted at zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s feet and addressed himself
to the corporal interpreter.</p>

<p><q>The son of the Lord-of-many-lands, that is the
King-God of the One-not-to-be-mentioned, sends
greeting to the son of the World-Trembler, called
Eyes-in-the-hands, and this message: &lsquo;Say unto the
man of many tongues as well as many eyes that the
jackal follows the lion that he may feed on the leavings;
the voice of the hyena is loudest when he eateth
offal!&rsquo;</q></p>

<p><q>What does the animal say?</q> demanded zu
Pfeiffer, impatient of the native preamble.</p>

<p><q>He says, Bwana,</q> said the interpreter, <q>that the
white man is sick and cannot move, but that he will
come as soon as he is well.</q></p>

<p>From the folds of his loin cloth the messenger was
dutifully extracting something wrapped up in a
banana leaf, which he handed to the interpreter as
he finished the message:</p>

<p><q>And by his slave he sendeth that which is mighty
magic; such magic that he who toucheth it shall
trumpet like unto a wounded cow elephant.</q></p>

<p><q>He says, Bwana,</q> continued the interpreter
glibly, <q>that he sends to the mighty Eater-of-Men
a small present,</q> and with the words the corporal
<pb n="274"/><anchor id="Pg274"/>
guilelessly proffered the small package. Zu Pfeiffer
took it and tore off the covering.&hellip;</p>

<p>Then was the magic of the new King-god of the
Unmentionable One made manifest to all men, and
particularly a group of chiefs hiding in a small thicket
beneath the hill, for indeed did the Son-of-the-Earthquake
trumpet like unto a wounded cow elephant
at the sight of an ivory disc on which was written:</p>

<p><q>Amantes&mdash;Amentes!</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD27" type="chapter">
<pb n="275"/><anchor id="Pg275"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 27</hi>
</head>

<p>All day at Fort Eitel had been stir and bustle,
the blare of trumpets and the barking of sergeants,
white and black. Long lines of women and slaves
streamed in from the surrounding countryside bearing
loads of corn and bananas. In the half-made parade
ground at the foot of the hill of Kawa Kendi, half a
company of Wongolo whom zu Pfeiffer had conscripted
from the chiefs, stumbled and ran in awkward squads.
In the hut of the Wongolo chiefs squatted Yabolo
among the rest, silently observing the preparations
for the punitive expedition which Sakamata had
informed them was being prepared in response to
the insolent challenge of the white man who had
allied himself with the <q>rebels.</q> But over them,
as well as every Wongolo in and about the place,
was a sullen air not of defiance but of expectant
listening.</p>

<p>In the mess hut a nervous Bakunjala prepared the
table for dinner, the whites of his eyes rolling at every
sound of zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s voice from the marquee adjoining.
Never in his experience, nor in that of other servants or
soldiers, had the demon so utterly possessed the dread
Eater-of-Men as since the receipt of some terrible
magic sent to him by the white man. Opinion was
divided as to whether this white man was the one
who had been arrested and sent to the coast with
<pb n="276"/><anchor id="Pg276"/>
Corporal Inyira or whether he was a brother; some
said that the magic leaf which the messenger had
brought was the soul of the white man, others
maintained that it was the incarnation of Bakra,
which explained why the Eater-of-Men was so
entirely possessed. Had he not screamed? they
demanded, which clearly proved, as everybody knew,
the dreadful agony as the ghost entered into the
body.</p>

<p>Even the white sergeants were frightened of their
chief. They had been seen talking together secretly,
doubtless discussing what medicine they could give
him to exorcise the demon. Had he not been
commanded by this demon to leave the safety of the
fort where they had the guns on the hills, and to go
into the forest where, as anybody knew, their eyes
would be taken from them so that they could not see
to kill the dogs of Wongolo? They were all conscious,
native-like, that something was brewing among the
Wongolo, but what it was exactly they did not know.
Two men had had fifty lashes that morning because
they had not saluted the totem&mdash;flag&mdash;correctly;
and a Wongolo chief had been shot because he had
not brought in the amount of ivory commanded.
None dared to warn the Eater-of-Men. Some one
had said that the <q>leaf</q> was the soul of the idol come
to lead the Eater-of-Men to destruction. This idea
took deep root among the Wunyamwezi soldiers, for
although they had delighted in the slaughter and
rapine under the leadership of the Eater-of-Men,
yet always had there been an uneasy feeling of sacrilege
in destroying an idol.</p>

<p>In the half of the marquee reserved for the Kommandant&rsquo;s
<pb n="277"/><anchor id="Pg277"/>
private quarters sat zu Pfeiffer in his camp
chair with the inevitable stinger at his elbow. Erect
by the door stood Sergeant Schultz taking details
for the disposition of stores and troops during the
absence of the punitive expedition. Never had he
in four years&rsquo; service seen the lieutenant as he was
now. Although Schultz could speak Kiswahili
fluently he knew no word of Munyamwezi, else he
might have been disposed to agree with Bakunjala
and his friends. As it was he thought that the Herr
Lieutenant had gotten a touch of the sun or was
drinking too heavily or perhaps a bit of both; for
to his mind the act of dividing up their scanty
forces and leaving their fortified positions to enter
the forest, with no chance of keeping open the
line of communication, appeared to be military
suicide.</p>

<p>He deemed it his duty to bring this point of
view to his Kommandant&rsquo;s notice, but he was
uncomfortably aware of zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s headstrong
character.</p>

<p><q>What time does the moon set, sergeant?</q>
demanded zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p><q>About three, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Good. Then at five precisely the column will
move. Warn Sergeant Schneider.</q></p>

<p><q>Ya, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>You will transfer the remainder of your
men and the Nordenfeldt as soon as we have
gone.</q></p>

<p><q>Ya, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>That is all, sergeant.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer dropped his head wearily on to his
<pb n="278"/><anchor id="Pg278"/>
hand. Schultz remained rigidly by the door. Zu
Pfeiffer glanced up peevishly.</p>

<p><q>I said that was all, sergeant,</q> he exclaimed
tetchily.</p>

<p><q>Ya, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Herr Gott, what are you standing there for like a
stuffed pig?</q></p>

<p>Schultz saluted.</p>

<p><q>Excellence, it is my duty to remind your
Excellence that according to regulation 47 of &hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>To hell with you and your regulations, damn
you.&hellip; Will you leave me alone!</q> The last
was almost a plea.</p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p>Schultz saluted briskly and went. Again zu
Pfeiffer&rsquo;s head dropped on to the cupped hand and he
gazed at the portrait in the ivory frame.&hellip; Against
the blue twilight of the door appeared a tall figure in
white.</p>

<p><q>What in the name of&qdash;</q> began zu
Pfeiffer.</p>

<p><q>Chakula tayari, Bwana,</q> announced Bakunjala
timidly.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t want any chakula,</q> said zu Pfeiffer.
<q>Wait. Bring some here.</q></p>

<p><q>Bwana!</q></p>

<p>Bakunjala fled, to reappear almost instantly with
a covered plate, which he placed on the table as
bidden and vanished. Zu Pfeiffer regarded distastefully
his favourite dish of curried eggs. Then he
bawled irritably:</p>

<p><q>Lights, animal!</q></p>
<pb n="279"/><anchor id="Pg279"/>

<p><q>Bwana!</q> gasped Bakunjala appearing in the
doorway with the lamp.</p>

<p>But zu Pfeiffer pushed the plate away to stare at
the photograph of Lucille. The stare turned to a
glare, and then as if mutinying against his god, as
Kawa Kendi had done when summoning rain, he
suddenly snatched at the frame and flung it upon the
floor with an oath, grabbed up a fountain pen and
began to write.</p>

<p>Indeed zu Pfeiffer was half insane with anger which
he was disposed to vent upon Lucille by proxy as
the source of yet another trouble and possibly official
disgrace. He had not had a notion that Birnier could
have survived the gentle hands of the corporal until
without warning came that ivory disc with <q>Amantes&mdash;Amentes!</q>
scribbled upon it, which not only inferred
that Birnier had escaped, but that he was near to
him and intended to champion these native dogs
against the Imperial Government in the person of
himself.</p>

<p>The message had been made the more insulting by
the note of exclamation at the end implying derisive
laughter. It had, as Birnier had calculated that it
would, struck zu Pfeiffer upon the most tender spot
in his mental anatomy, evoking a homicidal mania
which dominated his consciousness. To be cheated,
to be swindled, to be sworn at, cursed, even to be
beaten was sufferable to a degree, but to be laughed at&mdash;zu
Pfeiffer&rsquo;s haughty soul exploded like a bomb at
an impact. For a time he had been absolutely
incoherent with rage. His one impulse had been
to rush out and tear Birnier limb from limb. Well
might the listening natives believe in the mighty
<pb n="280"/><anchor id="Pg280"/>
magic of the new King-God, that it should make the
Son-of-the-Earthquake to trumpet like a wounded
cow elephant!</p>

<p>Then out of the dissolving acrid smoke of wounded
pride begin to loom arbitrary points. First, that
Birnier would have complained, as he once had threatened
to do, to Washington, which would infuriate
the authorities in Berlin; and secondly, that he would
have written to Lucille revealing the attempt he
had made upon the life of her husband as well as
the things he had said. How Birnier had escaped
was immaterial, but the particular fate that awaited
Corporal Inyira was decided but futilely; for the
bold son of Banyala and his merry men were footing
it to the south of lake Tanganika, scared by day lest
the long arm of the Eater-of-Men should overtake
them and haunted by the terror of seeing another
illuminated ghost by night.</p>

<p>As the jewelled hand glittered in the lamp-light
came the mutter of a distant drum on the moist
darkness; zu Pfeiffer, abnormally irritable, raised
his head, scowled, and muttering that he would have
to issue an order to have the drums stopped, bent
again to the uncongenial task of finishing the report
due for headquarters before he left. The drum ceased;
began again and was answered by another drum seemingly
nearer at hand.</p>

<p>Five or ten minutes elapsed. As zu Pfeiffer took
up a fresh sheet of paper a shot rang out followed
instantly by yells. Zu Pfeiffer with an oath
sprang to his feet, snatched at the revolver hanging
above his camp bed and rushed out as a fusillade of
shots mingled with wilder cries. The gruff coughs
<pb n="281"/><anchor id="Pg281"/>
of the corporal in charge of the guard competed with
the sharp barks of Sergeant Schultz. Zu Pfeiffer,
bawling for a sergeant, ran to the great gate where the
pom-pom was stationed. On the opposite hill red
flashes of rifle fire darted downwards. Came another
outburst of yelling. Forms of askaris scurrying to
their places round the fence brushed by him on every
side.</p>

<p><q>Sergeant Schultz!</q> shouted zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p>A figure in white appeared beside him in the
darkness.</p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p><q>Put the gun on them! Quick!</q></p>

<p>At the bark of the sergeant the gun crew, already
at their post, deftly manipulated the machine which
coughed angry red bursts of flame into the darkness.
The cries and howls ceased as suddenly as they
had begun.</p>

<p><q>Cease fire!</q> commanded zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p>In the resulting stillness muttered shouts and cries
from somewhere in the village below were punctuated
by odd shots from the other hill.</p>

<p><q>Sergeant Ludwig!</q> yelled zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p><q>Report!</q> snapped zu Pfeiffer.</p>

<p><q>An unknown body of natives attacked and killed
the sentry on the eastern gate, Excellence,</q> came
Sergeant Ludwig&rsquo;s voice from the gloom. <q>They
entered and were repulsed according to instructions.
That is all, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Losses?</q></p>

<p><q>None other, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>What about the lower guards?</q></p>
<pb n="282"/><anchor id="Pg282"/>

<p><q>I do not know, Excellence.</q></p>

<p><q>Take a platoon and investigate. We will cover
you with the gun.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence.</q></p>

<p>The mutter of his orders was drowned in the
excited jabber of the askaris.</p>

<p><q>Didimalla!</q> came the dreaded voice of
the Eater-of-Men. Instantly there was silence.
<q>Report!</q> commanded zu Pfeiffer to Sergeant
Schultz.</p>

<p><q>A body of natives attacked upon the western
gate, Excellence. They were repulsed.</q></p>

<p><q>Losses?</q></p>

<p><q>Two men killed and three wounded.</q></p>

<p><q>Ugm! Where&rsquo;s the interpreter?</q></p>

<p><q>Bwana!</q></p>

<p>Cloth creaked as the man saluted in the dark.</p>

<p><q>Where is Sakamata?</q> demanded zu Pfeiffer
in Kiswahili.</p>

<p><q>Here, Excellence,</q> replied Sergeant Schultz.
<q>He was running away. I had him arrested.</q></p>

<p><q>Good. Bring the animal to my quarters.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence.</q></p>

<p>The sergeant and the interpreter, with a trembling
Sakamata between them, followed zu Pfeiffer to the
tent. As he entered he picked up the portrait in
the ivory frame and replaced it carefully on the table
and sat down.</p>

<p><q>Ask the shenzie why he has not informed us of
this attack?</q></p>

<p>The interpreter put the question to the terrified
old man who mumbled that he had not known anything
about it.</p>
<pb n="283"/><anchor id="Pg283"/>

<p><q>Ugm!</q> grunted zu Pfeiffer. <q>Send for a
file of men, sergeant, and&qdash; No!</q> Zu Pfeiffer
rose. <q>I&rsquo;ll get the truth out of him. Stand aside,
corporal!</q></p>

<p>The corporal obeyed with alacrity as jerking his
revolver downwards zu Pfeiffer pulled the trigger.
The shot took off two of Sakamata&rsquo;s smaller toes. The
corporal grinned in appreciation. Zu Pfeiffer experienced
a shadow of the pleasure he would have had in
mutilating Birnier.</p>

<p><q>Pull him up!</q> commanded zu Pfeiffer. <q>Now
ask him again!</q></p>

<p>For a moment or two Sakamata, scarcely conscious
of any pain in his fright, could not comprehend
what was said; at length he mumbled and
muttered. The interpreter lowered his head to
listen.</p>

<p><q>Well?</q></p>

<p><q>He says, Bwana, that he does not know anything;
that they will not tell him, but that he has heard that
the god has come back.</q></p>

<p><q>The god! What god?</q></p>

<p><q>The god which these shenzie (savages) had here
before the Bwana came.</q></p>

<p><q>The idol!</q> Zu Pfeiffer ripped out an oath.
Then glaring questioningly at the shrunken figure on
the floor considered.</p>

<p><q>Tell him he lies. How does he know that the
idol has come back if they will not tell him anything?</q></p>

<p>Again the interpreter jabbered at Sakamata who
mumbled back.</p>

<p><q>He says, Bwana, that his words are white. That
<pb n="284"/><anchor id="Pg284"/>
they have not told him, but that he has heard the
message of the drums. &lsquo;The Fire is lighted!&rsquo;</q></p>

<p><q>What is that?</q></p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know, Bwana.</q></p>

<p><q>Ask him, you swine pig!</q></p>

<p><q>He says that whenever there is a new king
that they call out those words, meaning that he is
come.</q></p>

<p><q>Ugm!</q> Zu Pfeiffer took out a cigar and lighted
it as he considered. I believe the animal is right,
he reflected. That swinehund American has done
this! He turned sharply to Sergeant Schultz:
<q>Post double guards; bring me Ludwig&rsquo;s report
and take this thing away and have it shot.</q></p>

<p><q>Excellence!</q></p>

<p>The party went out. Zu Pfeiffer sat smoking
fiercely. A single shot rang out. Presently came
Sergeant Ludwig in person.</p>

<p><q>I have to report, Excellence, that the investigation
infers that the attack was only made with the
purpose of freeing the sons of chiefs, for the picket
has been slain but all the others are unhurt save three
wounded.</q></p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer swore mightily, but he dismissed the
sergeant with an admonition to have his troops ready
for inspection at four-thirty. He drank a brandy
neat and sat on, staring at the darkness. Then
suddenly he exclaimed and wheeled to the abandoned
report.</p>

<p><q>This is an undeniable overt act,</q> he muttered,
seeing what he considered an opportunity to neutralise
the suppositious complaint which Birnier had sent to
Washington; and taking up his pen began a formal
<pb n="285"/><anchor id="Pg285"/>
accusation against Birnier, as an American subject,
for having violated the international laws of the
Geneva Convention by aiding and abetting rebels of
his Imperial Majesty.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD28" type="chapter">
<pb n="286"/><anchor id="Pg286"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 28</hi>
</head>

<p>Sergeant Schultz&rsquo;s gloomy foreboding of
the inevitable result attending the refusal to follow
the teachings of his national preceptors was justified.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer, crazed with wounded pride or magic,
according to the white or black point of view, had
held rigidly to his schedule; precisely at four-thirty
he had inspected the expedition and marched at the
first streak of dawn. Schultz removed to the other
hill, leaving twenty-five men and a gun under a black
sergeant. Afterwards he visited the village. The
bodies of five of the picket were lying in the sun
mutilated. Not a native of any sort was to be seen
or heard. He sent out scouts. A village a couple
of miles away was deserted too. He wished to burn
the huts and plantation to clear the ground around the
fort but he dared not do so without orders. Muttering
to himself he returned and posted double
sentries.</p>

<p>Throughout the day and the moonlight not a
sound of a drum or the voice of a native disturbed the
moist heat. He slept for a while and then took to
pacing upon the levee outside the fort. He was
aware of a restlessness among the men. About
midnight a nervous sentry fired at a moving shadow
in the village. Erratic shots followed; flickered and
ceased at the sergeant&rsquo;s angry order. The trees
seemed to whisper mockingly. The sergeant decided
<pb n="287"/><anchor id="Pg287"/>
that it must have been a prowling jackal or hyena;
but the incident made him irritable.</p>

<p>In ordinary circumstances he would have posted
picket sentries as provided by the regulations, but he
could not spare any of his fifty men, for in the case
of an attack they would never regain the fort. The
moon sank as if reluctantly, seeming to hesitate upon
the fringe of banana fronds at something that she
alone could see. But the night creaked slowly on.
Schultz knew that the favourite hour for an attack
was just at the first glimmer of dawn when the spirits
are making for their homes and the light is deceptive.</p>

<p>He was standing in front of the Nordenfeldt when
a sentry&rsquo;s keener ears caught a peculiar whispering
rustle. As Schultz turned his head to listen, the
whisper grew in volume to the sound of a hail-storm&mdash;the
patter of bare feet on sand. Faint light on spears
rippled round the base of the hills. Schultz sprang
inside the barrier barking at his men to open fire. He
deflected the muzzle of his gun and began pumping
nickel into the advancing mass of yelling figures.&hellip;</p>

<p>The rush carried the fort; for the defenders
were out-numbered by fifty to one. Schultz fell under
a dozen spear thrusts. The askaris were massacred
to a man before the sun rose inquiringly beyond the
sacred hill of Kawa Kendi.</p>

<p>When all the bloody acts of war were done and the
triumphant yelling quietened, there came from across
the river a pulsing trickle of sound in the sizzling heat,
which was answered by a thundering crash of spear
against shield and the <q>Ough! Ough!</q> of three
thousand warriors gathered upon the hill to do homage
to the Unmentionable One.</p>
<pb n="288"/><anchor id="Pg288"/>

<p>Across the river, at the ford where Bakuma had sung
her swan song, came the procession led by the craft
in full panoply. In the van stalked Bakahenzie, grave
and solemn as befitted the high priest. Around him
capered with untiring energy a group of lesser wizards
whose duties were as those of professional dancers,
having dried bladders and magic beads fastened to
their ankles and wrists. Then behind Marufa a
litter was borne by sacred slaves doomed to perish
after performing their holy office, in which, swathed
entirely from the public gaze, was Usakuma, the
Incarnation of the Unmentionable One. In another
litter, as securely screened, was the son of the Lord-of-many-Lands,
endeavouring to endure a perpetual
bath of sweat in the sacred cause, peeking professorial
eyes through the interstices, scribbling in a notebook.
Behind again marched Mungongo bearing a
smouldering brand of the Sacred Fire; then Yabolo,
reinstated in office for a reason that any politician will
understand. After him came more litters bearing the
magic <q>things</q> of the Incarnation of an Incarnation,
the King-God.</p>

<p>As they splashed across the river, like troops of bronze
gazelle, women and girls dashed eager to gather of
fertility from the water enchanted by the passage of
the Bearer of the World.</p>

<p>So they came through the banana plantation and
up the wide street which the Son-of-the-Earthquake
had planned. The chant quavered like a dragonfly
in the sun and the chorus of the warriors replied with
the rhythm and the profundity of gargantuan frogs.
Then as Bakahenzie stepped upon the incline of the
hill, burst from the women the cricket song which is
<pb n="289"/><anchor id="Pg289"/>
made tremolo by the rapid beating of the fingers upon
the lips, as from the drums went out the message over
the land that the Unmentionable One had indeed
returned to the Place of Kings, the City of the Snake.</p>

<p>Ten minutes later a half-stewed god, as exhausted
as any emperor after a state parade, was permitted
to emerge from the litter and to recuperate within
the cool of the unfinished house that was to have been
the bungalow of the Kommandant. No one else
save the Keeper of the Fires, Bakahenzie and Marufa,
were within the stockade which ringed the fort.
Outside rose the mutter and rumble of the warriors
and the cries of the women. The huddled lines of
huts which had been barracks were already in process
of demolition at the hands of the slaves, and the square
within the fort was cleared of the slain askaris by the
simple process of heaving the bodies over the palisade.
The idol remained within the litter until the consecrating
of the defiled ground should be performed by
Bakahenzie and the craft.</p>

<p>No Wongolo nor any wizard, not even Bakahenzie,
would touch the enchanted coughing monsters; but
as the holy slaves were already doomed they were set
to pull and to push the Nordenfeldt from the embrasure
beside the entrance across the levee until it toppled
over and rolled half-way down the hill, where it was
allowed to stay, surrounded from morning to night
by a crowd of women and children and idle warriors.</p>

<p>The thirst which afflicted Birnier rendered him
oblivious of his godhood and of the sacred office of
Mungongo who was dutifully busy upon his knees
blowing up the sacred fires from the ember which he
had carried; so that at a summons to bring water
<pb n="290"/><anchor id="Pg290"/>
he was both embarrassed and awed, for the presence
of the High Priest intensified his natural terror of
breaking any of the meshes of the tabu. At the
second imperative demand Bakahenzie soothed the
angry god by commanding a slave to run to fetch
water from without. But even then Birnier had the
parched felicity of waiting while the High Priest
solemnly exorcised the gourd of water which, as all
food, could not be permitted to pass the lips of the
King-God without the prescribed incantations.</p>

<p>However, within quite a reasonable time the sacred
prisoner was accommodated with the possession of his
goods, magic and culinary. The bungalow of the
Kommandant, Birnier gathered, was to be converted
into the temple after the ceremony of purification,
and the idol was to stand in front in the place occupied
by its predecessor at the coronation of the late Kawa
Kendi.</p>

<p>All that day were Bakahenzie and Marufa and the
wizards working hard at the various ceremonies of
purification of those who had slain, the consecration
of the Holy Hill, and the exorcising of the evil spirits
attached thereto by the residence of the Son-of-the-Earthquake.
Meanwhile Birnier and Mungongo were
left to themselves within the enclosure to listen to
the chanting and thrumming of the drums. Birnier
had much to do in compiling his notes and reflections;
Mungongo nothing save to prepare their meals and
attend the Sacred Fires.</p>

<p>Exactly what had happened Birnier did not know
and could not extract from Bakahenzie, who adopted
his usual effective method of ignoring every direct
question. Before they had left the place in the forest
<pb n="291"/><anchor id="Pg291"/>
he had informed Birnier that the commands of the
spirit of Tarum through the magic ear had been
performed, but with what restrictions, modifications,
or embroideries, Birnier had no means of ascertaining.
His definite knowledge was that Zalu Zako, together
with other chiefs and a vast crowd of warriors, were
to remain in the forest where zu Pfeiffer was to be led
into ambush by the power of the magic which he had
sent, the American flag, an idea which certainly tickled
Birnier&rsquo;s sense of humour considerably, particularly
as it appealed to him, if successful, as an ideal case of
poetic justice.</p>

<p>That zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s fort had fallen was obvious,
although what the disposition of his forces had been
and of how the assault had been carried, Birnier had no
idea. But of one thing he was reasonably sure, and
that was that his analysis of zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s reactions and
the psychological effect upon the natives of having
the idol reinstated in the Place of Kings, had been
entirely correct. After all, as he admitted with a
smile, zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s system of native psychology had
been based on the same fundamental principles as
his own except that he had not reckoned with the
unknown quantity, the equal intelligence working
against him and able to discount his moves, plus heavier
artillery in the form of an emotional broadside, the
possibility of which rather naturally had never occurred
to him.</p>

<p>An item which worried Birnier was that he had
no means, and could hope for none apparently, of
discovering whether and to what extent his orders
through the phonograph had been carried out
regarding the treatment of the white men. Their
<pb n="292"/><anchor id="Pg292"/>
fate at the hands of the Wongolo, particularly after
the merciless massacres inflicted by zu Pfeiffer, would
scarcely bear imagining. From the fact of the instant
and apparently easy success of the assault on the
forts, he did not doubt that zu Pfeiffer, who had been
foolish enough to be lured into dividing his forces,
was doomed to defeat. In this instance he would not
have any of the advantages of his triumphal entry
into the country; would not be able to accomplish
a surprise attack, and the weakening of the native
moral by massacre and the downfall of the idol;
in fact he had these very forces against him: for the
success of their first venture, their overwhelming
numbers in the forest, the exaltation of fanaticism
excited by the restoration of their tribal god, practically
tacked a label of suicide upon his military actions.</p>

<p>During that day Bakahenzie, evidently too busy
with the duties of his office, did not come near to
him. But that evening, in order to ensure as far as
possible obedience to his orders through the mouth of
the oracle, Birnier caused Mungongo to chant further
instructions into the phonograph commanding that
the Son-of-the-Earthquake was to be brought alive
to receive judgment from the Unmentionable One
through the Incarnation, the son of the Lord-of-many-Lands.
Whether this would work or not
Birnier of course could not know. Already had he
discovered that nobody could control the complicated
machinery of the native tabu any more than any
one statesman could manage always any vast political
machine; indeed he, as many others, might more
than conceivably be ground up by the gargantuan
engine with whose starting lever he had played. All
<pb n="293"/><anchor id="Pg293"/>
he could do had been done; nothing remained but
to adopt Marufa&rsquo;s favourite maxim: <q>wait and
see.</q></p>

<p>In the evening Mungongo, who had at length been
persuaded to project his eyes beyond the sacred ground
even if he would not his feet, reported that much
chanting and drumming indicated that the warriors,
or a great number of them, had departed, evidently
to reinforce the troops of Zalu Zako or with the
object of taking zu Pfeiffer in the rear: a fact which
made Birnier a little uneasy lest the news of the fall
of the station might bring zu Pfeiffer to his senses and
cause him to return, in which case the position might
prove to be somewhat uncomfortable.</p>

<p>However, the night passed to the soft thrumming
of the drums. At dawn appeared Bakahenzie as
solemnly as usual. He began by demanding that the
<q>pod of the soul</q> of Tarum should be prepared to
listen to him. Birnier observed a slight increase
in the domineering manner and realized more keenly
that unless he checked that tendency the worthy
High Priest would become altogether unmanageable.</p>

<p>Birnier commanded Mungongo to bring forth the
instrument and reproduced for Bakahenzie&rsquo;s benefit
the oration of the previous night. Bakahenzie listened
solemnly, grunted acquiescence, and again made
his request. Birnier refused abruptly. Again Bakahenzie
grunted acceptance which caused Birnier to
speculate upon what move the wily doctor had in
mind. However, after the usual starting of false
trails, he announced that the consecration of the idol
would take place that day and began to instruct the
new god in his divine duties. That there was something
<pb n="294"/><anchor id="Pg294"/>
unusual in the form, either exaggerated or
curtailed, Birnier gathered from Bakahenzie&rsquo;s method
of expounding the rites; and the solution came in
the announcement, just before leaving, that as
soon as the Son-of-the-Earthquake had been <q>eaten
up,</q> that he, Bakahenzie, would summon the craft
and the people to the Harvest Festival.</p>

<p>The form of the statement again drew Birnier&rsquo;s
attention to the fact that Bakahenzie was assuming
the reins of power far too fast for his satisfaction;
that unless he contrived to put on the curb he would
never attain the goal of a beneficent agent nor be
able to satisfy his professional curiosity.</p>

<p>However, when he had gone, Birnier began anew
to question Mungongo regarding the reputed ceremonies
of the festival, but beyond the fact that it
was an occasion allied to the Christian-Pagan festival
of a kind of thanksgiving for the harvest and sacrifice
to the god which involved the ceremony of the
marriage of the Bride of the Banana, Mungongo knew
nothing.</p>

<p>In the afternoon Birnier was required to preside at
the consecrating of the ground and the setting up
of the idol. But all he had to do was to squat silently
in front of the new temple and before Bakahenzie and
the group of the cult, while the concourse of the other
wizards and the few chiefs that were not away grunted
a belly chorus upon the levee without. The ceremony
was disappointing as ceremonies go, for beyond the
stewing in the great calabash of a magic concoction
with which to anoint the hole for the feet of the idol,
the doorposts of the temple and the House of Fires,
to the accompaniment of the usual chanting and
<pb n="295"/><anchor id="Pg295"/>
drumming, it was ended by a dance, with Bakahenzie
as the premier danseur.</p>

<p>After his evening meal of boiled chicken, goat flesh
and milk, Birnier squatted in the doorway of his new
quarters smoking. He had no lights as his store of
carbide was finished. Before leaving for the forest
to carve the Incarnation of the new Unmentionable
One, he had had the forethought to despatch a
messenger to a certain village on the great lake to
intercept his carriers with goods and the mail for
which he had sent after escaping from the noble
son of Banyala; he had already informed Bakahenzie
of the coming of a fresh stock of magic and impressed
upon him that great precaution must be taken to
ensure that it came directly to him, lest contact with
strangers should offend the spirits. Bakahenzie had
assented in his usual non-committal manner, a
manner that was beginning to get upon Birnier&rsquo;s
nerves.</p>

<p>As he smoked, staring up at the great moon over
the sinister head of the idol framed in the green
light, he observed that the day after the next would
be the full moon, the Harvest Moon, the time of
the yearly festival. Then, by a coincidence which
sometimes seems to have a telepathic basis as explanation,
he heard a curious soft sound from apparently
behind the hut. Mungongo, squatting near his
Sacred Fires in the immobile manner of the native,
heard the sound too. Again a sibilant whisper,
almost like the hiss of a snake, brought a <q>Clk</q> of
astonishment to Mungongo&rsquo;s lips. He rose swiftly
and disappeared behind the hut. Another muffled
exclamation of astonishment aroused Birnier&rsquo;s curiosity.
<pb n="296"/><anchor id="Pg296"/>
He followed, to find Mungongo leaning over the
palisade as if speaking to some one.</p>

<p><q>Ehh!</q> murmured a familiar voice. <q>&rsquo;Tis
Moonspirit!</q></p>

<p>With a grunt of horror Mungongo turned upon
Birnier and began to push him away, gasping: <q>She
is accursed! If the evil of her eyes rest upon thee
thou art sick unto death!</q></p>

<p><q>The devil take you!</q> muttered Birnier, angry
at the touch of force; then recollecting that the tabu
forbade alien eyes to gaze on his sacred body upon
which the world depended, he realized that Mungongo
was trying to save him. He held him off by the arms,
saying: <q>Be quiet, thou fool! Hath not my magic
shown thee that I am above all magic?</q></p>

<p>Mungongo appeared to consider that there was
some truth in the statement and at any rate it gave
him something to think about. He stood passively
but as if momentarily expecting Birnier, magic or no,
to melt before his eyes. Bending over the fence
Birnier saw the slender form of Bakuma crouched
against the earth.</p>

<p><q>What dost thou here, O little one?</q> he whispered,
for of course he knew nothing of her fate after
the abduction by MYalu.</p>

<p>So horror-struck at her own temerity in approaching
the person of the King-God was she that she dared
not raise her eyes as she stuttered:</p>

<p><q>A demon hath driven the bird of my soul into
the net of thy wrath.</q></p>

<p><q>Still the black wings in thy breast, O Bakuma,</q>
said Birnier, trying to soothe the child. <q>Come
thou within and show thy father thy bosom.</q></p>
<pb n="297"/><anchor id="Pg297"/>

<p><q>Ehh! Ehh!</q> gasped Bakuma, quivering in
greater panic than ever.</p>

<p>Aware of the danger Birnier stooped, took her by
the arms and lifted her over the palisade, remarking
the violent trembling of the frail little body whose
limbs seemed like candles.</p>

<p><q>Come thou,</q> said Birnier, moving towards the
hut.</p>

<p>But she cowered where he had dumped her, covering
her eyes with her hands so that she gazed not upon the
sacred body. Mungongo stood like a tree, the whites
of terrified eyes glimmering in the moonlight. Birnier
picked up the girl and carried her into the hut,
followed by a quaking Keeper of the Sacred Fires.</p>

<p><q>Go, thou fool,</q> commanded Birnier, <q>and
watch that none approaches!</q> Mungongo gasped.
But he obeyed. <q>Now, little one,</q> continued Birnier,
<q>bare thy bosom that I may know how to make
the magic of healing.</q></p>

<p>Squatting on the threshold, her emaciated arms
still covering her eyes, Bakuma strove to obey. At
length she faltered out the story of her double abduction.
The capture by the askaris had made but little
difference to her, for, as she phrased it, the beak of
her soul was like unto the mouth of the crocodile.
Her captor had thrust her into a hut in the village
together with some other female captives, but as the
man had had to continue his military duties, night
had fallen before he returned, by which time she had
bribed some of the women, whose captivity was not
as loathsome to them as the pride of their race should
have made it, with a powerful charm which Birnier
had given her, a nickel-plated razor-strop. She had
<pb n="298"/><anchor id="Pg298"/>
escaped. But more fearful of her doom as the Bride
of the Banana than she was of MYalu or the askaris,
she had hidden in the forest, living upon wild fruit and
roots. Then had she heard the drums announcing the
return of the Unmentionable One, and aware that
Moonspirit had gone into the forest to seek Him, had
guessed that he was triumphant. Away in the
jungle she had heard the sound of the rejoicing at
the homecoming of the King-God; had hesitated, and
at last she had come to Moonspirit, in spite of his
divinity, in the fluttering hope of aid, driven by a
demon to break another tabu, the same demon which
urges so many to break magic circles&mdash;the subconscious
love motive.</p>

<p>Poor kid! commented Birnier to himself as he
regarded the pitiful cowering form. We haven&rsquo;t
gotten the nuptial torches for you yet, but we will,
by God!&hellip; Give me thine ear, O little one.&hellip; But
as he talked to her, soothing the terror by promises
of mightier magic, came Mungongo crying in a terrified
whisper that Bakahenzie was claiming audience. At
the back of the next room of the bungalow, built
upon a plan of the one in Ingonya, was a bathroom,
and into that was Bakuma hurried and bidden to lie
as quiet as a crocodile.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD29" type="chapter">
<pb n="299"/><anchor id="Pg299"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 29</hi>
</head>

<p>Bakahenzie had come to announce that the
certain magic <q>things,</q> which a messenger had
brought from the white man&rsquo;s country, had arrived.
Although he could not expect an answer to his letter
to Lucille in Europe, there might be others; and such
an event as the receipt of a mail once in six months is
apt to be exciting. Birnier forgot his r&ocirc;le for the
moment, leaped to his feet preparatory to rushing out
to meet the runner, but a grunt from Bakahenzie and
an alarmed cry from Mungongo were just in time to
prevent him from jeopardizing the stability of the
world and all that he had won by violating the tabu by
stepping beyond the sacred ground. Other gods and
emperors have indeed wrecked empires through a
lesser aberration. Even realization of the penalty was
scarcely enough to hobble his impatient legs, for the
very suggestion of what the mail represented melted
the fetters of this native world as wax in the sun.</p>

<p>Indeed more effort of will was required to return to
his god-like throne upon the camp-bed, and to amble
through the etiquette which discussion of such an
important matter demanded, than to carry the idol on
his back through the forest and bear the sound thrashing
to boot. Then as a further test, Bakahenzie slowly
developed a dictum that the magic things could not be
permitted to enter the sacred enclosure until they had
been disinfected from the multitude of evil eyes
<pb n="300"/><anchor id="Pg300"/>
through which they must have passed. At that the
god came near to swearing or weeping, he did not
know which.</p>

<p>But as he fumed inwardly he recollected that at
any moment Zalu Zako and his troops might return;
or if the battle had gone the other way, then zu
Pfeiffer; in the former case the excitement would
still further delay the goods and mail, and the latter
event might entail the complete loss. As well as the
growing irritation caused by Bakahenzie&rsquo;s interminable
list of tabus was the necessity of proclaiming, or rather
gaining, his authority before he could be of any
assistance either to Bakuma, the white men or himself.
Indeed he had been waiting the arrival of these goods
to secure the subjection of Bakahenzie to his will.
He determined that the trial should be now. Merely
to demand would, he felt, arouse the obstinacy of the
chief witch-doctor, who would never, unless compelled
by force or cunning, give up the reins of power which
to him was the <hi rend="font-style: italic">raison
d&rsquo;&ecirc;tre</hi> of his life. Birnier must
attack through the line of least resistance. With the
carriers bearing the mail was a case of <q>imprisoned
stars</q> (rockets) and a special cinema outfit, so that
Birnier felt that he could afford to explode the last
manifestation of magic which remained to him. After
a judicious interval, he said to Bakahenzie:</p>

<p><q>O son of Maliko, is not my tongue the tongue of
the Unmentionable One?</q></p>

<p><q>He who knoweth all things knoweth that which is
white,</q> retorted Bakahenzie.</p>

<p><q>Verily. Therefore do thou cause to be brought
that which is come, that which the fingers of the
Unmentionable One are hungry to touch. Thou
<pb n="301"/><anchor id="Pg301"/>
knowest his power of magic. Therefore are the evil
eyes of the multitude but dry leaves in the wind of his
breath.</q></p>

<p><q>Indeed thy words are white, O son of the Lord-of-many-Lands.</q></p>

<p><q>Depart then that the hunger of His fingers may
be appeased.</q></p>

<p><q>The drums speak not yet of the eating up
of Eyes-in-the-hands. Hath not the ear of the
spirit of Tarum spoken upon these matters?</q>
inquired Bakahenzie in his favourite dialectical
manner.</p>

<p><q>The spirit of Tarum hath naught to say
to thee,</q> replied Birnier, <q>but the fingers of
Tarum will to make thee to itch even as his
fingers.</q></p>

<p>Birnier called to Mungongo who brought and placed
at his feet a fairly powerful electric battery. Bakahenzie
eyed the box; curiosity was keenly awakened.
He stared interestedly when Birnier raised the lid.
Taking the handles he said:</p>

<p><q>These, O son of Maliko, are the hands of Tarum
made manifest. He wishes that thou shouldst feel
the itch of his desire!</q> and with the words he clapped
one handle to the belly and the other at the base of
the spine of the chief witch-doctor. Bakahenzie
convulsed as he was compelled to do. Swiftly Birnier
applied the shock to the shoulders, holding the handles
there as he remarked to a violently trembling
Bakahenzie: <q>Behold! the itch of the fingers
of Tarum!</q></p>

<p>But as he lowered his hands towards the spine again,
Bakahenzie moved rapidly and with no dignity.</p>
<pb n="302"/><anchor id="Pg302"/>

<p>Solemnly Birnier replaced the handles and closed the
lid, and said quietly:</p>

<p><q>Thou hast felt, O brother magician, that the
fingers of Tarum do itch indeed?</q></p>

<p><q>Truly!</q> responded Bakahenzie with a celerity as
unusual as the quaver in his voice. <q>Indeed thy
words are white, O mightiest of magicians. What
are indeed the evil eyes of savages against the
power of thy magic, O son of the Lord-of-many-Lands!</q></p>

<p>And contrary to all precedent Bakahenzie rose and
left. Within a quarter of an hour his voice announced
that slaves with the magic <q>things</q> were without the
palisade, and called upon Mungongo to go to the gate
to fetch them as strangers were forbidden even to
look upon the King-God. Birnier, by the light of a
torch, opened the mail, sent a wad of letters and
a sheaf of telegraph slips on to the floor, and
snatched a long green envelope scrawled in French
characters:</p>

<p>Monsieur le Curateur du Jardin des Plantes.</p>

<p>For a moment he stared at it perplexedly, for there
was no stamp or cancellation.</p>

<p><q>What in the name&qdash;</q> he muttered as he slit it
open.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right; margin-right: 2">
  <name type="place">Entebbe,&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;</name><lb/>
  <date>Ao&ucirc;t 13, 19&mdash;</date><lb/>
</p>

<p>Mon petit loup, what have you been doing? O&ucirc;
est tu? Comment et pourquoi? Oh, I am cross
with you, with Monsieur le Professeur! Why do you
write me so ridiculous a letter? I laugh, but always
<pb n="303"/><anchor id="Pg303"/>
I laugh, so what good is that to you? I will not reply
to your letter, mon vieux&mdash;jamais. But I will tell
you so that you may know why I am here. Yes,
parmi les animaux!<lb/></p>

<p>Birnier winced at the phrase which seemed to come
back at him like a boomerang from the lips of zu
Pfeiffer.<lb/></p>

<p>I am to go for vacation to Wiesbaden with some
very terrible peoples. Oh, on me d&eacute;go&ucirc;te! I have an
engagement for the winter in Berlin as before. I have
engagement for Paris&mdash;eh! but&mdash;pouf! Figure me on
the charming <hi rend="font-style: italic">Mauretania</hi> and I am
sitting on the deck
where you once made yourself so ridiculous. Rappelle
toi? I am sick&mdash;No, mon vieux, pas du mal de mer!
I should not be for everybody to look at. Oh, no! I
am sick, I tell you. Je r&ecirc;ve de mon petit coco parmi
les sales animaux! Je me dis: Zut! il est fou! il est
tap&eacute;! Mais en moi m&ecirc;me je l&rsquo;adore! Tout de suite
I tell a creature who brings me my books, my fan, un
esp&egrave;ce de tapette, je m&rsquo;en vais l&agrave;, moi! He ask
me where? I tell him I go to look for mon amant in
Afrique Centrale! Mais oui! He thinks I am mad!
I tell him so and I laugh! How I laugh. But he is
right, yes, je suis folle&mdash;de toi!</p>

<p>Alors I come to Marseilles and I catch a boat to
Mombassa. Ouf! Je vais mourir &agrave; cause de mon
petit loup! La mer rouge! Quel cauchemar! Enfin
I still arrive what of Lucille is left and I ask for you, for
Monsieur le Professeur Americain, but no one knows
you. On the boat I have attached to myself trois
mousquetaires Anglais. Tous les trois sont dr&ocirc;les!
<pb n="304"/><anchor id="Pg304"/>
They bring me on the ever so funny little train to here.
Entebbe. Les Anglais sont tr&egrave;s polis, tu sais! Monsieur
le Gouverneur stop drinking whisky politely to tell me
that Monsieur has been and has gone! Quelle horreur!
You have gone but three days! Pense tu! I ask
myself what have I done that the bon Dieu should be
so unkind. Then quel malheur! I remember to
myself that I commence to come to you on
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Friday!</hi>
You laugh! Yes, I laugh too but&mdash;Quien sabe? I
commence to come to you on a Friday and you are
gone three little days!</p>

<p>Then my good friends, les trois mousquetaires, send
for me a what they call a runner&mdash;the red
peas&mdash;C&rsquo;est
dr&ocirc;le! but the little pea black he did not find
you. He brings a message that you had gone to some
place with a terrible name.</p>

<p>Then come the two most ridiculous letters. I will
<hi rend="font-style: italic">not</hi> reply to any such
ridiculous letters&mdash;jamais!<lb/></p>

<p>Birnier scowled. Two letters? he muttered.
What letters?<lb/></p>

<p>You must come now. Immediately. I want you.
I will wait here for you. You must leave your
ridiculous animals as I have left mes affaires for you.
Come to me. I wait for you.<lb/></p>

<p>Lower down on the same page, but written with a
thick pen, the letter continued:<lb/></p>

<p>Again I have read your absurd letter. Tu es fou!
You make such a noise because this foolish young man
is jealous of mon mari and make you to go round the
<pb n="305"/><anchor id="Pg305"/>
detestable country, which you like so much, instead of
straight through to the ridiculous place you say you
want to go.<lb/></p>

<p>Birnier smiled grimly.<lb/></p>

<p>Peuh! <corr sic="Ecoute"><anchor id="E30"/><ref
target="e30">&Eacute;coute</ref></corr>,
mon cher, it is true I have met the
young man in Washington. Mon Dieu, are there not
plenty of young men in Washington, Paris, Berlin?
He fell in love with me. Mon Dieu, they are as thick
as the blackberries! Perhaps I tease him pour faire la
blague! Pourquoi pas? I give him a photograph
and I sign it, just as I sign plenty for amusing friends.
But then he become too ridiculous. He has no sense
of humour comme tous les Allemands. He wishes to
fight all my friends, tes compatriotes si sombres et
graves! Figure toi! Then he make a challenge and
naturellement it is not the custom in thy country.
Mon pauvre petit Dorsay refuse and this person
become crazy wild, as you say, and he strike him with
his cane in the street. Quelle horreur! Quel
scandale! He run away of course. The Embassy
help him. Qui sait? That is the last I hear until
I receive this ridiculous letter, together with thy
ridiculous letter. I send him to you. How dr&ocirc;le that
you two should meet all among les animaux. It is so
funny that he did not kill you, this monstre allemand!
Tu es en cross encore avec moi? Zut! mon vieux
it is not my fault that everybody goes mad after
me except mon petit mari! Leave the ridiculous
gar&ccedil;on where he is. But why do I talk so much about
a cochon? Because you are ridiculous! Tant pis
pour toi! Now sois gentil and come to me
<hi rend="font-style: italic">immediately</hi>&mdash;unless
<pb n="306"/><anchor id="Pg306"/>
you love your sales animaux plus que moi!
If you do not come I will never never, jamais de ma
vie, give you one single baiser again! No! Mille
baisers! Mais comme je te deteste!<lb/></p>

<p rend="text-align: right; margin-right: 2">
  <name><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Lucille.</hi></name><lb/>
</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD30" type="chapter">
<pb n="307"/><anchor id="Pg307"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 30</hi>
</head>

<p>Forty-eight hours later, the furious drumming,
chanting and screaming heralded the return of the
victorious troops of Zalu Zako. Birnier from his gaol
on the hill watched the bronze flood pour like a stream
of lava out of the plantation and flood the village,
spears flashing silver points in the slanting rays of the
sun. But what had happened to zu Pfeiffer and the
white sergeants? No sign of them could he see.
Waves of sound lapped continuously around the
temple.</p>

<p>The long mauve shadow of the hill ate up the village.
Fires began to flicker amid the huts and away in the
recesses of the plantation. The lowing of cattle added
to the general clamour. As the western sky was still
ablaze with incandescent colour stole the cold green of
the advancing moon in the east.</p>

<p><q>Mungongo, what are thy brethren about to do?</q></p>

<p><q>It is the Festival of the Harvest, as I have told thee,
O son of the Lord-of-many-Lands.</q></p>

<p><q>But they have not the Bride?</q></p>

<p><q>Nay.</q> Mungongo glanced apprehensively towards
the temple where in what was to have been a bathroom,
was Bakuma hidden. <q>He-who-may-not-be-mentioned
demands but blood. The Bride is the food
of the wizards. But to each warrior is every woman
his bride this night.</q></p>

<p><q>Why didst thou not tell me this thing before?</q>
<pb n="308"/><anchor id="Pg308"/>
demanded Birnier, who knew that such was one of the
customs of primitive tribes in all parts of the world
and in all ages.</p>

<p><q>Thou didst not ask me,</q> retorted Mungongo, to
whom the affair was such a matter of course that it
was not worth mentioning.</p>

<p><q>Do they make sacrifice?</q></p>

<p><q>The Bride is married to the Banana, but of the
manner of her nuptial know I not. Am I a wizard?</q></p>

<p>The divine king grimly watched his subjects. In the
growing light flitted gnomes around the huts in and
out the sepia caverns of the plantation. As a banana
front was etched in sepia against the great moon, the
ocean of clamour was cleft by the high treble of the
tribal troubadour. At the bottom of the wide street
appeared dancing figures. As they approached,
Birnier could distinguish Bakahenzie, Marufa and
Yabolo in the van, dressed in full panoply, whirling and
leaping with untiring energy. Behind them shuffled
and pranced a vast mass of warriors, behind whom
again several hundred women shrilled and wriggled in
the mighty chorus. The rhythm of the drums
increased to the maddening action impulse of the two
short&mdash;long beat:</p>

<p>Pm-pm&mdash;Pommmmm! Pm-pm&mdash;Pommmmm!
Pm-pm&mdash;Pommmmm!</p>

<p>The treble solo of the chant darted above that throb
and grunt like a mad bird skimming the turbulent tops
of a dark forest.</p>

<p>Pm-pm&mdash;Pommmmm! Pm-pm&mdash;Pommmmm!
Pm-pm&mdash;<corr sic="Pommmm"><anchor id="E31"/><ref
target="e31">Pommmmm</ref></corr>!</p>

<p>The rhythm seemed like a febrile pulse within
Birnier&rsquo;s brain, dominating him with hypnotic suggestion
<pb n="309"/><anchor id="Pg309"/>
to action. An urge to scream and to yell, to
dance and to leap, plucked at his limbs. Resurgent
desires from he knew not what subconscious catacombs,
wriggled and struggled furiously within him.
The great moon scattered blue stars upon the spears
as if upon the green scales of some leviathan squirming
in delirious torment.</p>

<p>Control the twitching of his muscles to that rhythm
Birnier could not. He had to fight to resist the waves
of hysteria permeating the air. He glanced at
Mungongo. The whites of his eyes were rolling.
Birnier cursed the insistency of the drums and the
orgiastical grunts. Forcibly he kept up a running
fire of psychological explanations: <q>Annihilation of
inhibitions &hellip; dissociation of personality &hellip;
triumph of the subconscious animal,</q> as a wizard
muttering incantations against evil spirits. He felt
dizzy. <q>God, I&rsquo;m drunk with rhythm!</q> he exclaimed.</p>

<p>The priests were entering the large gate of the
outer enclosure. In the village and on the opposite
hill the people resembled a swarm of black locusts.
The drums ceased. Bakahenzie and Marufa and
Yabolo ran straight towards him screeching. This
was the cue.</p>

<p>Birnier walked back slowly. In awful silence they
began to push the idol. The wood creaked protestingly.
Slowly the mass slid on to Birnier&rsquo;s back.
He gripped it and began to walk to the entrance. As
he passed Mungongo the Sacred Fires shot up yellow
tongues. A sound like a moan rose dripping with
screams and grew into a continuous thunder of noise.
The drums rippled a furious tattoo. The three
<pb n="310"/><anchor id="Pg310"/>
wizards dashed before him, leaping high in the air.
Birnier shuffled a dozen yards to the left and turned.
He stopped.</p>

<p>Upon the ground, just within the outer gate in
view of the multitude beyond, green ivory in the
moonlight, was the naked figure of a white man.
Above him pranced Bakahenzie in whose hand gleamed
a knife.</p>

<p>The training of his life enabled Birnier to throw upon
the screen of his mind the essential points more rapidly
than conscious thought. Bakahenzie, as well as the
others, was in an abnormal state of excitement. There
was no time to employ <q>magic</q> rockets or anything
else. He swung the idol upon one shoulder and ran
forward. He saw the blue eyes move and the bracelet
wink in the moonlight as he stepped over the bound
form. He bent, balancing the image upon his shoulders,
and seized zu Pfeiffer by the arm.</p>

<p>The throb of the drums and the roar of the people
who knew not but that this act was in accordance with
the rules, continued. The priests remained motionless:
expectant. Bakahenzie stood rigid as if paralysed
by the unexpected: the knife was a blue snake in his
hand.</p>

<p>Half blinded with sweat, with his muscles cracking,
Birnier staggered on with the heavy burden, dragging
the nude body after him. Hours seemed to pass, each
second of which might bring a spear in his back before
he reached the place before the temple. He slid the
idol into the hole and turned.</p>

<p>From the tumult of sound the screech of Bakahenzie
shot up like a snipe from a rice field. The other
wizards sprang with him. The moonlight kissed a
<pb n="311"/><anchor id="Pg311"/>
spearhead beside the stone figure of Mungongo by the
Sacred Fires. Birnier leaped, plucked the spear,
caught zu Pfeiffer in his arms and raised him
shoulder high that all might see.</p>

<p>At the entrance of the enclosure Bakahenzie and the
other two were arrested by astonishment. Lowering
the body to the base of the idol which leaned sideways
in a drunken leer, Birnier lifted the spear and brought
it down accurately between zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s left arm and
breast, and dropping swiftly upon his knees to cover
his actions, slashed his own left forearm. Then he
jumped to his feet and held the blooded spear aloft
as he cried aloud:</p>

<p><q>The god hath taken his own!</q></p>

<p>Bakahenzie was the first to see that the white breast
of the victim was indeed deluged in blood; perhaps
the veneration engendered by <q>the fingers of Tarum</q>
moved beneath the blood lust.</p>

<p><q>The god hath taken his own!</q> he repeated in a
piercing scream. Marufa echoed the shout. As they
turned the cry was ricocheted beyond the farthest hill.</p>

<p><q>The god hath taken his own!</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="WD31" type="chapter">
<pb n="312"/><anchor id="Pg312"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Chapter 31</hi>
</head>

<p>The reflection of a shaft of moonlight through the
half-completed thatch upon zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s <q>magic</q>
mirror, which the natives had not dared to remove, set
afire the sapphires upon his bracelet as he sat rigidly
in a camp chair in a suit of pyjamas. Upon the bed
lay Birnier, nursing his bandaged left arm. Now
and again the thrumming, chanting and the shrilling
of the saturnalia without rose into discordant yells
like a gust of wind whipping tree-tops into fury.</p>

<p>Zu Pfeiffer appeared taciturn and suspicious.
Perhaps the slackening of his will, tautened to meet
death as his caste demanded that he should, and the
confrontation of the object of his violent hate, had
completely unnerved him. When Birnier had dragged
him within and cut his bonds, he had grunted curt,
official thanks for the rescue. As sullenly he had
hesitated at the offer of the pyjamas, but as if deciding
that he could not retain any dignity in his own bloodied
skin, had accepted them, as well as a sorely needed
drink of water.</p>

<p>The reaction after the crisis, and possibly the influence
of the general hysteria in the air, had distorted Birnier&rsquo;s
vision of things. He was very conscious of a neurotic
desire to laugh unrestrainedly. Thus it was that for
nearly half an hour the two men remained in the gloom
in silence. Birnier had a psychological comprehension
of the highly nervous tension of his guest. For he
<pb n="313"/><anchor id="Pg313"/>
had long ago realized that the only solution of zu
Pfeiffer&rsquo;s crazy statement that he was engaged to the
wife of a man to whom he was speaking, indicated a
form of insanity.</p>

<p>A psychological law is that natural emotions must
have an outlet; if they are repressed they are apt to
cause a state of mental disease which in an aggravated
form may lead the patient to the asylum, but in the
incipient stage are as common as jackals in Africa. Zu
Pfeiffer was suffering from such a case of mild psychosis.
Brought up under an iron code which did not permit
his instincts to react, the repressed emotions bubbled
out in the form of a deification of his Kaiser and the
adoration of Lucille, both states being absolutely apart
from all reason, indeed approached to a state of
dissociation of consciousness. The desired unattainable
is projected into the dream plane, the realm of
myth. Such a case is the historical one of the man
who, keenly intelligent upon every subject mentioned,
startles the visitor by the demand for a piece of toast,
gravely explaining that he is a poached egg and that
he wishes to sit down; or as Pascal, who ever had
beside him the great black dog. To attempt to
rationalise with such an one was merely to excite the
insane part of him. So it was that Birnier determined
to ignore the subject entirely, perfectly aware that the
sullenness of the man sitting in the camp chair opposite
to him was caused by an exaggerated terror that he
would insist upon speaking of the one subject which
should be tabu.</p>

<p>The associative suggestion of Lucille diverted his
mind until he became immersed in thoughts of her.
A queer vision of a well-fed tiger playing with a kid
<pb n="314"/><anchor id="Pg314"/>
entered his mind. More conscious than ever of her
attraction by reason of the intensified sense of her
wrought by her letter, he glanced surreptitiously at
the rigid form in the chair and a wave of pity mixed
with a half conscious pride that she belonged to him,
rose within him. Then Birnier started as he was
brought back to a realization of the passing of time by
a harsh voice that told of creaking nerves:</p>

<p><q>Herr Professor, what is your pleasure to do with
me, if you please?</q></p>

<p><q>I beg your pardon!</q> Birnier sat up. <q>Er&mdash;naturally
I shall endeavour to get you away as early as
possible. It would be as well if you took advantage of
the present&mdash;er&mdash;saturnalia to escape. I cannot do
much. I can provide you with a gun and food. As
you are not injured you should be able to get a reasonable
distance from here by morning; for the rest I
am afraid you must fend for yourself. I wish that I
could do more, but I&rsquo;m afraid that my power is not
yet sufficient to ensure any help from the natives.</q></p>

<p>An inarticulate sound emerged from zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s
mouth. Birnier&rsquo;s eyes caught the sheen of the
photograph upon the wall. Escape! Lucille! Almost
involuntarily he stretched out a hand and took Lucille&rsquo;s
letter from the table. Again came zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s
voice:</p>

<p><q>I thank you, Herr Professor, but I cannot accept&mdash;for
myself.</q> Birnier stared at him. <q>I wish you to
understand that for myself that is impossible.</q> The
tall figure seemed to straighten in the chair. <q>But as
I have the honour to serve his Imperial Majesty I am
bound to preserve to the best of my ability my body in
order to answer for my culpable negligence which has
<pb n="315"/><anchor id="Pg315"/>
resulted in the loss of my two companies. Most
distinctly, Herr Professor, I wish you to know that I
accept your offer in order to place myself before the
Court Martial that awaits me.</q></p>

<p>Birnier almost gasped. That this anomaly of a
man, who was capable of cold-blooded murder at the
prompting of an hallucination, and who now appeared
equally capable of the utter annihilation of self at the
service of his Imperial Master, meant what he said,
Birnier did not doubt. Yet it was not anomalous.
Logical in fact; the capability of supreme sacrifice
for either of his idols.</p>

<p><q>I understand you, Lieutenant,</q> said he courteously.
<q>I&qdash;</q> The two letters in his hand crackled.
Before he could master the mean desire he had handed
the second letter to zu Pfeiffer with the words:</p>

<p><q>Forgive me, I have here a letter which it is my
duty to return to you.</q></p>

<p>The sapphires winked as zu Pfeiffer held up the letter
in the shaft of moonlight. There was a suppressed
grunt as of pain. Zu Pfeiffer rose stiffly and walked
to the door. His tall figure was silhouetted in profile
against the green sky and as Birnier watched he saw a
gleam as of crystal upon an eyelash. Birnier, ashamed
of his sole vengeance, turned away.</p>

<p>But as if revenge were recoiling upon him came in
the wake of that satisfied primitive instinct a surge of
longing for Lucille. Lucille! Lucille! God! how
he desired to see those eyes again! Feel those lips and
hear the gurgle of her laughter! Sense the perfume
of her hair as she murmured: <q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Mon
petit loup!</hi></q>
Birnier sat holding the letter. He fought with an
impulse to abandon everything to go to her&mdash;if he
<pb n="316"/><anchor id="Pg316"/>
could get out! How stale and monotonous the
adventure and the scientific interest suddenly seemed!
After all, what had he accomplished? What could he
accomplish? Even yet he had learned but little of the
secrets of the witch-doctor&rsquo;s craft. Perhaps there was
little or nothing to learn? And zu Pfeiffer? He
stared across at the portrait of Lucille. And as he
gazed a wave of pity rose within him for this boy made
mad by the witchery of those eyes and the music of
that voice. A sentence in Lucille&rsquo;s letter appeared
to stand out from the context: <q><hi
rend="font-style: italic">Mon Dieu, they are
as thick as the blackberries!</hi></q></p>

<p>And yet&mdash;and yet&qdash; Why the devil had she
taken it into her head to come out to Uganda above
all places? he asked himself. She was so damnably
near to him. He smiled satirically as he recollected
her phrase about those fools who made of love a
nuisance, and yet now what was she doing? After
all the suspicion in his mind that love is everything to
a woman seemed proven true.</p>

<p>But how adorable she was! He fingered the letter
as if it were part of her. Well, she was young; success
and adulation from one capital to another had interested
and amused her for a few years, but when
Milady had suddenly discovered that the Career bored
her she had thrown up everything and logically&mdash;to her
mind&mdash;expected her mate to do likewise! With what
insouciance had she treated the affair of zu Pfeiffer and
the youngster whom he had struck. When Birnier had
met her she had had a story of a young fool count in
Paris who had shot himself, merely because she would
not listen to his suit; and she had protested with one
of those wonderful shrugs and a moue, saying that she
<pb n="317"/><anchor id="Pg317"/>
could not marry all the men in the world! That
apparently bloodthirsty indifference had of course
tended to make more men <q>crazy wild,</q> as she put it,
about her. And that reputation had added to her
numerous attractions even to Birnier.</p>

<p>He could escape if he wished&mdash;with zu Pfeiffer. He
could take Mungongo with him. Yet would Mungongo
dare the tabu at his bidding? Birnier doubted it.
Would Mungongo even consent to let him, Birnier,
who was now in his eyes the King-God, go and so
imperil the foundations of the native world? Birnier
was certain that he would not. They were all
dominated by this confounded idol of wood, he reflected.
Bakahenzie, or even Mungongo, would cheerfully
sacrifice him if either imagined that the damned
Unmentionable One desired it, at the suppositious
bidding of something which was nothing.</p>

<p>Through the sweet scent of her in the air like a
compelling aura about him, came suddenly zu Pfeiffer&rsquo;s
voice speaking in the accents of agony; yet all he
said was:</p>

<p><q>Herr Professor Birnier&mdash;I am compelled&mdash;to&mdash;to
apologise for &hellip;</q></p>

<p>The voice failed and the haughty blond head turned
away, unable to complete to the uttermost the greatest
sacrifice he had ever attempted.</p>

<p><q>Please don&rsquo;t,</q> said Birnier comprehendingly. <q>I
understand.</q></p>

<p>And Birnier did comprehend; realised the small hell
in zu Pfeiffer as a higher developed tabu did a childish
tabu unto death. Zu Pfeiffer, white man, had been
just as guilty of an attempt to commit murder at the
suppositious inversion of a thumb of an idol as Bakahenzie;
<pb n="318"/><anchor id="Pg318"/>
not an idol of wood but the projection of his
subconscious desires. Zu Pfeiffer would sacrifice a
million at the bidding of his Kaiser, whose divinity was
the same myth, the projection of himself. Yet what
had been Birnier&rsquo;s object in undertaking all these pains
and penalties but to study mankind in the making, the
black microcosm of a white macrocosm; to aid them
to a better understanding of themselves and each
other? Was not Bakahenzie an embryonic zu
Pfeiffer? How could one aid a zu Pfeiffer if one did
not know a Bakahenzie?</p>

<p>From the saturnalia in progress outside came another
swirl of sound seeming to lap mockingly against the
motionless figure of zu Pfeiffer silhouetted against a
green sky; and above him towered the idol leaning
sideways.</p>

<p>As if in drunken laughter of the follies of black
and white humanity! mused Birnier. Yet what
am I doing? At the crook of a dainty finger am I,
too, to bow to an idol? Am I to pity zu Pfeiffer and
these children?&hellip; Savages! Good God, what
am I?</p>
<!-- <pb n="319"/><anchor id="Pg319"/>
[Blank Page] -->

<!-- <pb n="320"/><anchor id="Pg320"/>
[Blank Page] -->

<!-- <pb n="321"/><anchor id="Pg321"/>
[Blank Page] -->

<!-- <pb n="322"/><anchor id="Pg322"/>
[Blank Page] -->

</div>

</body>

<back>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right" type="extra pages">
    <index index="toc"/>
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">
      <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Extra Pages</hi>
    </head>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right" type="extra pages">
      <pb n="1"/><anchor id="Pg1"/>
      <p rend="text-align: right">
      <hi rend="font-size: 150%">Witch-Doctors</hi></p>
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always" type="extra pages">
      <pb n="2"/><anchor id="Pg2"/>
      <p rend="margin-left: 8"><hi rend="font-style: italic">L&rsquo;homme
      est bien insens&eacute;! il</hi><lb/>
      <hi rend="font-style: italic">ne s&ccedil;auroit forger un ciron,
      et</hi><lb/>
      <hi rend="font-style: italic">forge des dieux &agrave; douzaine!</hi></p>
      <p rend="margin-left: 24"><hi rend="font-size: 75%">MONTAIGNE</hi></p>
    </div>
  </div>

  <div rend="page-break-before: right" type="errata">
    <index index="toc"/>
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">
      <hi rend="font-size: 100%">Errata</hi>
    </head>

    <list><anchor id='e1'/>
      <item>CHARACTERS</item>
      <item>Changed: Ludwig&emsp;&emsp;<ref target="E1"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">do. do.</hi></ref></item>
      <item>To: Ludwig&emsp;&emsp;<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">German sergeant</hi></item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e2'/>
      <item>CHARACTERS</item>
      <item>Changed: Schneider&emsp;&emsp;<ref target="E2"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">do. do.</hi></ref></item>
      <item>To: Schneider&emsp;&emsp;<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">German sergeant</hi></item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e3'/>
      <item>Chapter 1</item>
      <item>Changed: &ldquo;This Saka&mdash;Saka&rdquo;&mdash;<ref
        target="E3"><hi rend="font-weight: bold">Zu</hi></ref>
        Pfeiffer glanced at</item>
      <item>To: &ldquo;This Saka&mdash;Saka&rdquo;&mdash;<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">zu</hi>
        Pfeiffer glanced at</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e4'/>
      <item>Chapter 1</item>
      <item>Changed: retreat. At <ref target="E4"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">MFunga</hi></ref>
        MPopo&rsquo;s is the</item>
      <item>To: retreat. At <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">MFunya</hi>
        MPopo&rsquo;s is the</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e5'/>
      <item>Chapter 1</item>
      <item>Changed: As <ref target="E5"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Zu</hi></ref>
        Pfeiffer nodded languidly</item>
      <item>To: As <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">zu</hi>
        Pfeiffer nodded languidly</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e6'/>
      <item>Chapter 1</item>
      <item>Changed: seemed to escape <ref target="E6"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Zu</hi></ref>
        Pfeiffer. He gave</item>
      <item>To: seemed to escape <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">zu</hi>
        Pfeiffer. He gave</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e7'/>
      <item>Chapter 1</item>
      <item>Changed: man&rsquo;s arrival?&rdquo; demanded <ref
        target="E7"><hi rend="font-weight: bold">Zu</hi></ref>
        Pfeiffer harshly.</item>
      <item>To: man&rsquo;s arrival?&rdquo; demanded <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">zu</hi>
        Pfeiffer harshly.</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e8'/>
      <item>Chapter 1</item>
      <item>Changed: Zu <ref target="E8"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Peiffer</hi></ref>
        finished the report leisurely</item>
      <item>To: Zu <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Pfeiffer</hi>
        finished the report leisurely</item>
    </list>
 
    <list><anchor id='e33'/>
      <item>Chapter 3</item>
      <item>Changed: I thank you<ref target="E33"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">,</hi></ref>
        And if&qdash; Were</item>
      <item>To: I thank you<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">.</hi>
        And if&qdash; Were</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e9'/>
      <item>Chapter 6</item>
      <item>Changed: as balanced as a dancer&rsquo;s<ref target="E9"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&nbsp;</hi></ref></item>
      <item>To: as balanced as a dancer&rsquo;s<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">.</hi></item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e10'/>
      <item>Chapter 6</item>
      <item>Changed: to matters of more importance.<ref target="E10"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&rdquo;</hi></ref></item>
      <item>To: to matters of more importance.<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&nbsp;</hi></item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e11'/>
      <item>Chapter 9</item>
      <item>Changed: shall lave hungry ears of<ref target="E11"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&nbsp;</hi></ref></item>
      <item>To: shall lave hungry ears of <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&qdash;!</hi></item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e12'/>
      <item>Chapter 9</item>
      <item>Changed: <ref target="E12"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-h</hi></ref>!</item>
      <item>To: <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">E-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-e-h</hi>!</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e13'/>
      <item>Chapter 9</item>
      <item>Changed: As we &hellip;<ref target="E13"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&nbsp;</hi></ref></item>
      <item>To: As we &hellip;<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&rdquo;</hi></item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e14'/>
      <item>Chapter 9</item>
      <item>Changed: The personality of <ref target="E14"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Bernier</hi></ref>
        had been apparently</item>
      <item>To: The personality of <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Birnier</hi>
        had been apparently</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e15'/>
      <item>Chapter 9</item>
      <item>Changed: and the two <ref target="E15"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Nordenfelts</hi></ref>
        and two pom-poms</item>
      <item>To: and the two <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Nordenfeldts</hi>
        and two pom-poms</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e17'/>
      <item>Chapter 11</item>
      <item>Changed: &ldquo;<ref target="E17"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee</hi></ref>!&rdquo;
      </item>
      <item>To: &ldquo;<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee</hi>!&rdquo;
      </item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e18'/>
      <item>Chapter 11</item>
      <item>Changed: <ref target="E18"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee</hi></ref>!</item>
      <item>To: <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Aieeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee</hi>!</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e19'/>
      <item>Chapter 13</item>
      <item>Changed: in of fresh <ref target="E19"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">masssacres</hi></ref>
        adding to the</item>
      <item>To: in of fresh <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">massacres</hi>
        adding to the</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e20'/>
      <item>Chapter 14</item>
      <item>Changed: Yabolo near to <ref target="E20"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Zaku</hi></ref>
        Zako&rsquo;s continued. Neither</item>
      <item>To: Yabolo near to <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Zalu</hi>
        Zako&rsquo;s continued. Neither</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e21'/>
      <item>Chapter 14</item>
      <item>Changed: enemy, Bakahenzie, presented <ref target="E21"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Zaku</hi></ref>
        Zako with a </item>
      <item>To: enemy, Bakahenzie, presented <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Zalu</hi>
        Zako with a </item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e22'/>
      <item>Chapter 14</item>
      <item>Changed: which walk ever <ref target="E22"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">the the</hi></ref>
        red devils in</item>
      <item>To: which walk ever <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">the</hi>
        red devils in</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e23'/>
      <item>Chapter 14</item>
      <item>Changed: the minds of <ref target="E23"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Zako Zalu</hi></ref>
        and Marufa the</item>
      <item>To: the minds of <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Zalu Zako</hi>
        and Marufa the</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e24'/>
      <item>Chapter 15</item>
      <item>Changed: village of MFunya <ref target="E24"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">MPope</hi></ref>
        &mdash;of that day</item>
      <item>To: village of MFunya <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">MPopo</hi>
        &mdash;of that day</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e25'/>
      <item>Chapter 15</item>
      <item>Changed: not his policy <ref target="E25"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">tomake</hi></ref>
        his thunder too</item>
      <item>To: not his policy <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">to make</hi>
        his thunder too</item>
    </list>
  
    <list><anchor id='e26'/>
      <item>Chapter 17</item>
      <item>Changed: position of chief <ref target="E26"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">witch doctor</hi></ref>,
        he would do</item>
      <item>To: position of chief <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">witch-doctor</hi>,
        he would do</item>
    </list>
 
    <list><anchor id='e27'/>
      <item>Chapter 18</item>
      <item>Changed: earth, and when<ref target="E27"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&qdash;</hi></ref>
        and when&qdash;&rdquo; He</item>
      <item>To: earth, and when<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&mdash;</hi>
        and when&qdash;&rdquo; He</item>
    </list>
 
    <list><anchor id='e28'/>
      <item>Chapter 19</item>
      <item>Changed: in their solar <ref target="E28"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">plexes</hi></ref>.</item>
      <item>To: in their solar <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">plexus</hi>.</item>
    </list>
 
    <list><anchor id='e32'/>
      <item>Chapter 22</item>
      <item>Changed: the village of <ref target="E32"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Yangonyama</hi></ref>,
        but shortage of</item>
      <item>To: the village of <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Yagonyana</hi>,
        but shortage of</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e29'/>
      <item>Chapter 24</item>
      <item>Changed: the white god.<ref target="E29"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&nbsp;</hi></ref></item>
      <item>To: the white god.<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&rdquo;</hi></item>
    </list>
 
    <list><anchor id='e30'/>
      <item>Chapter 29</item>
      <item>Changed: Peuh! <ref target="E30"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Ecoute</hi></ref>,
        mon cher, it</item>
      <item>To: Peuh! <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&Eacute;coute</hi>,
        mon cher, it</item>
    </list>
 
    <list><anchor id='e31'/>
      <item>Chapter 30</item>
      <item>Changed: Pm-pm&mdash;<ref target="E31"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Pommmm</hi></ref>!</item>
      <item>To: Pm-pm&mdash;<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Pommmmm</hi>!</item>
    </list>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter"/>
  </div>  
</back>

</text>

</TEI.2>
